
2038.PDF
POTENTIAL CEMENT PHASES IN SEDIMENTARY ROCKS DRILLED BY CURIOSITY AT GALE 
CRATER, MARS. E. B. Rampe1, R. V. Morris
2, D. L. Bish
3, S. J. Chipera
4, D. W. Ming
2, D. F. Blake
5, D. T. 
Vaniman6, T. F. Bristow
5, P. Cavanagh
3, J. D. Farmer
7, S. M. Morrison
8, K. Siebach
9, A. H. Treiman
10, C. N. Achilles3, D. Blaney
11, J. A. Crisp
11, D. J. Des Marais
5, R. T. Downs
8, K. Fendrich
8, J. Martin-Torres
12, J. M. Morookian11
, M.-P. Zorzano13
, P. Sarrazin14
, N. Spanovich11
, A. S. Yen11
, and the MSL Science Team. 1Aerodyne Industries 
 Jacobs JETS Contract, NASA-JSC, Houston, TX 77058, elizabeth.b.rampe@nasa.gov, 2NASA-JSC, 3Indiana 
Univ., 4CHK Energy, 
5NASA-Ames, 
6PSI, 
7Arizona State Univ., 
8Univ. Arizona, 
9Caltech, 
10LPI, 
11JPL-Caltech, 
12CSIC-UGR, 
13INTA-CSIC, 
14SETI. 
 
 
Introduction: The Mars Science Laboratory rover 
Curiosity has encountered a variety of sedimentary 
rocks in Gale crater with different grain sizes, diagenetic features, sedimentary structures, and varying degrees 
of resistance to erosion. Curiosity has drilled three 
rocks to date and has analyzed the mineralogy, chemical composition, and textures of the samples with the 
science payload. The drilled rocks are the Sheepbed 
mudstone at Yellowknife Bay on the plains of Gale 
crater (John Klein and Cumberland targets), the Dillinger sandstone at the Kimberley on the plains of Gale 
crater (Windjana target), and a sedimentary unit in the 
Pahrump Hills in the lowermost rocks at the base of 
Mt. Sharp (Confidence Hills target). CheMin is the Xray diffractometer on Curiosity, and its data are used to 
identify and determine the abundance of mineral phases. Secondary phases can tell us about aqueous alteration processes and, thus, can help to elucidate past 
aqueous environments. Here, we present the secondary 
mineralogy of the rocks drilled to date as seen by 
CheMin and discuss past aqueous environments in 
Gale crater, the potential cementing agents in each 
rock, and how amorphous materials may play a role in 
cementing the sediments. 
Methods: The CheMin instrument collects Co-K 
X-ray diffraction patterns in a Debye-Scherrer transmission geometry, and the resulting 2D patterns are 
converted to 1D patterns by circumferential integration 
(Fig. 1). Rietveld refinement techniques produce unit 
cell parameters for individual minerals [1], and 
FULLPAT models determine abundances that include 
poorly crystalline and amorphous phases [2]. The composition of the amorphous component is calculated by 
subtracting the composition of all crystalline phases as 
determined through models of CheMin data from the 
bulk APXS composition of the drill fines [3,4]. 
Sheepbed Mudstone: Models of CheMin data 
from John Klein and Cumberland show that the major 
phases in the Sheepbed mudstone include plagioclase, 
pyroxene, trioctahedral smectite (Fe-saponite), and 
amorphous phases (Fig. 2a,b) [5]. Minor phases include magnetite, anhydrite, bassanite, akaganeite, sanidine, and pyrrhotite. 
Smectite, Ca-sulfates, and akaganeite are secondary 
minerals that may be cementing the Sheepbed mudstone. Furthermore, the mineral assemblage suggests 
that the saponite and magnetite are authigenic and 
formed in-situ from the alteration of olivine and amorphous material [5-7]. Calculations of the amorphous 
component show that the amorphous materials are enriched in FeOT, CaO, Na2O, SO3, and P2O5 and depleted in SiO2, Al2O3, and MgO relative to a basaltic glass 
composition [5]. These calculations are being updated 
based on new refinements of unit cell parameters (see 
Morris et al., this meeting), but the values suggest the 
amorphous material is secondary and may be composed of nanophase Fe-oxides (npOx), amorphous sulfates and phosphates and/or sulfate and phosphate 
chemisorbed to surfaces of nanophase materials [8], 
and minor amounts of amorphous silicates 
Dillinger Sandstone: The unit cell parameters for 
the minerals in the Windjana target are being refined at 
the time of this writing. Models of XRD data show that 
the major phases in the Dillinger sandstone include 
pyroxene, K-feldspar, magnetite, phyllosilicate (illite 
and/or smectite), and amorphous phases (Fig. 2c). The 
minor phases include plagioclase, akaganeite, anhydrite, pyrrhotite, ilmenite, and hematite (see Treiman et 
al., this meeting, for a complete discussion). 
Phyllosilicate, anhydrite, akaganeite, and magnetite 
are potential secondary minerals that may help cement 
the Dillinger sandstone. The origin of these phases 
(i.e., authigenic or detrital) is unknown. Preliminary 
calculations of the amorphous component in Windjana 
show that it is enriched in FeOT, MgO, and SO3, and 
depleted in SiO2, Al2O3, CaO, and Na2O relative to a 
basaltic glass composition. This composition suggests 
that the amorphous component is made up of secondary phases, possibly including npOx, amorphous sulfates, and minor amounts of amorphous silicates. 
Pahrump Hills: Unit cell parameters for the minerals in the Confidence Hills target are also being refined at the time of this writing. Models show that the 
major phases are plagioclase, pyroxene, hematite, phyllosilicate (smectite and/or illite), and amorphous materials (Fig. 2d). Minor phases include magnetite, forster2038.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
ite, K-feldspar, and jarosite (see Cavanagh et al., this 
meeting, for a complete discussion). 
Phyllosilicate, hematite, and jarosite are potential 
secondary minerals that may help cement these sediments. The origin of these phases is currently unknown. Preliminary calculations of the composition of 
the amorphous component show that it is enriched in 
SiO2 and SO3, suggesting that it is secondary, may have 
formed in a leaching environment, and may help cement these sediments. 
Discussion: There are a variety of secondary phases that may cement the rocks at Gale crater, and if 
these phases are authigenic, they imply that the sediments experienced different aqueous conditions and 
multiple fluid episodes. The presence of Ca-sulfates 
and saponite in John Klein and Cumberland suggests 
an aqueous environment with low ionic strength and 
near neutral pH [5]; however, the presence of akaganeite suggests acidic fluids also affected the sediments. 
The abundance of K-spar and the potential presence of 
illite in Windjana must be considered when interpreting 
the formation of the Dillinger sandstone because these 
phases can form in diagenetic K-rich environments on 
Earth [e.g., 9]. The presence of Fe-sulfates in Confidence Hills rather than Ca-sulfates indicates an episode 
of acidic aqueous fluids in the sediments at the base of 
Mt. Sharp, and the hematite and jarosite could have 
formed in-situ from oxidized Fe-rich fluids. Calculations of the amorphous component in each rock suggest 
amorphous phases are secondary and the composition 
varies between samples. 
References: [1] Rietveld H. M. (1969) J. Appl. 
Cryst., 2. [2] Chipera S. and Bish, D. (2002) J. Appl. 
Cryst., 35. [3] Morris R. V. et al. (2013) LPS XLV, 
#1319. [4] Morris R. V. et al., this meeting. [5] Vaniman D. et al. (2014) Science, 343. [6] Bristow T. et al. 
(in press) Am. Mineral. [7] Bridges J. et al. (2014) Met. 
Soc., #5344. [8] Rampe E. et al. (2013) AGU Fall 
Meeting. [9] Waugh B. (1978) J. Geol. Soc., 135. 
 Figure 1. CheMin 1D XRD patterns. 
 Figure 2. Modeled mineralogy of A) John Klein, B) 
Cumberland, C) Windjana, and D) Confidence Hills 
samples. Phases with asterisks are at the detection limit 
of CheMin. 
2038.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
