
2124.PDF
EXPLORING CURIOSITY S FUTURE PATH FROM ORBIT: THE VIEW OF LOWER MT. SHARP 
FROM INTEGRATED CRISM, HIRISE, AND THEMIS DATASETS.  A. A. Fraeman
1
, C. S. Edwards
1,2
, B. L. 
Ehlmann
1,3
, R. E. Arvidson
4
, J. R. Johnson
5
, and M.S. Rice
6
. 
1
Caltech (afraeman@caltech.edu; M.S. 150-21, 1200 E. 
California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125), 
2
USGS Flagstaff,
 3
JPL, 
4
Washington University in St. Louis, 
5
JHU/APL, 
6
Western Washington University 
 
Introduction: Analyses of orbital data over Mt. 
Sharp have shown the area is mineralogically and mor-
phologically diverse [e.g. 1-5] (Fig. 1).  Here we com-
bine Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer 
for Mars (CRISM), High Resolution Imaging Science 
Experiment (HiRISE), and Thermal Emission Imaging 
System (THEMIS) derived thermal inertia (TI) orbital 
datasets to provide detailed, local context for the Curi-
osity Mars rover s ongoing in situ investigation. 
Datasets: A 25 cm/pixel color HiRISE mosaic pro-
vides high-spatial resolution morphologic coverage and 
spectral information (blue-green, red, and near-infrared 
color bands) of the lower flank of Mt. Sharp (Fig. 1). 
This mosaic was generated by orthorectificiation and 
georeferencing of 8 HiRISE color images, normalizing 
data from individual HiRISE detectors and images to 
one another, removing illumination effects due to re-
gional slope across the image, and applying a uniform 
stretch piecewise across the scene [6, 7].  Elevation 
information at 1 m resolution is also available in DEMs 
generated from HiRISE stereo-pairs. 
CRISM visible/shortwave infrared data covering 
544 wavelengths from ~0.4   4  m provide additional 
hyperspectral coverage but at a lower spatial resolu-
tion.  We focus on standard 18 m/pixel full resolution 
targeted (FRT) CRISM observations in this work, and 
CRISM data collected in an along-track oversampled 
(ATO) manner that can be projected down to ~9 
m/pixel are also available [8]. 
A 100 m/pixel TI mosaic was generated by select-
ing the best quality THEMIS observations of the re-
gion, and when necessary, shifting some values of ad-
jacent images by a small offset (~10-30 TI units, ap-
proximately equivalent to the absolute TI uncertainty) 
to match overlapping regions and to remove residual 
seasonal temperature differences [7, 9]. All data prod-
ucts are georeferenced and coregistered with one an-
other using a series of ground control points. 
CRISM mineralogy from endmember mapping: 
Techniques that have been used previously to detect 
the weak VNIR spectral features on lower Mt. Sharp 
include generating parameter maps to mathematically 
highlight subtle spectral changes,  ratioing spectra from 
areas of interest to spectrally bland (dusty) material, 
averaging 10s-100s of spectra over large spatial areas, 
and processing CRISM data with noise-filtering algo-
rithms [2-4].   
In this study, we build on previous work and use 
endmember mapping to highlight areas of mineralogi-
cal interest. We generated a library of scene-based 
spectral endmembers derived from regions within each 
CRISM observation (hematite, sulfates, clays, hydrated 
materials) that were identified in previously published 
work [2-4].  We then calculated the difference (Euclid-
ean distance) between every spectrum in a scene and 
each endmember, normalizing all spectra to reduce 
effects of overall albedo variations and then focusing 
the comparison on wavelength regions where the 
CRISM detector has the best signal-to-noise. The re-
sulting maps (e.g. Fig. 2a) highlight likely detections of 
these phases that are less noisy and more consistent 
between CRISM scenes as compared with standard 
CRISM parameter mapping. 
Iron-oxide correlation with long-distance in situ 
observations: We have compared areas in the CRISM 
observations that are spectrally similar to the hematite-
ridge with long-distance, visible wavelength ChemCam 
passive spectral observations of lower Mt. Sharp ac-
quired by Curiosity on sol 467 [10] (Fig. 2b). Iron ox-
ides in ChemCam data are indicated by greater band 
depths near 535 nm and steep fall-off >~747 nm; some-
times a weak absorption near 670 nm is also apparent 
(Fig. 2b, Line 1, spec. #9, 10, Line 2, spec. #10). These 
datasets are in good agreement with each other, 
demonstrating the ability to link ground-based and or-
bital datasets to direct Curiosity to stratigraphic units of 
discrete composition.  
CRISM, HiRISE, and TI correlations: 2D scat-
terplots were generated to highlight regions with simi-
lar properties across the CRISM, HiRISE, and TI da-
tasets.  Fig. 3 shows one such example that distin-
guishes five classes of materials.  Dark, basaltic sands 
in the dune fields have the lowest TI values (~285) in 
the scene and are associated with low 770:440 nm 
spectral slopes and deep absorptions at 1000 nm (red). 
Layers in the sulfate stack on Mount Sharp have simi-
larly low TI values, but are spectrally distinct from the 
dunes based on their much higher 770:440 nm spectral 
slope and shallow 1000 nm absorptions (yellow). Much 
of the Murray formation has material that fall within 
into two clusters of TI values (~320, ~370; (green, blue 
respectively), and likely represent mixing between a 
clastic bedrock and basaltic sands originating from the 
Bagnold dune field. Regions that cluster near the lower 
TI values qualitatively correspond to bluer regions in 
2124.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
the HiRISE color mosaic (Fig. 1b), although there is a 
not a strong quantitative difference between the two in 
the CRISM parameter space. For this particular suite of 
THEMIS and CRISM parameters, Murray Formation-
like materials are also found higher on Mt. Sharp near 
the Phyllosilicate Trough while the hematite ridge does 
not map distinctly. The highest thermal inertia values 
in the scene (~425) correspond to materials in a fan-
like structure located at the end of a long channel (cy-
an). 
Conclusions and future work: The rich collection 
of morphologic, color, spectral, and thermophysical 
property data will continue to be examined to refine the 
definition of discrete geologic units within Mt. Sharp. 
Results from our continued analyses and comparisons 
of various orbital data sets will be incorporated into 
strategic plans for Curiosity drives and science targets.  
Acknowledgements: Funding for this work was provided in 
large part by Caltech GPS Division Texaco & Keck Institute for 
Space Studies Postdoctoral Fellowships. 
References: [1] Anderson, R. and Bell, J. (2010) Mars Journal, 
5, 76-128 [2] Milliken, R. et al., (2010), GRL, 37, 4 [3] Fraeman, A. 
et al., (2013), Geology, G34613.1 [4] Seelos, K. et al., (2014) GRL, 
41, 14 [5] Milliken, R. et al.,  (2014) GRL, 41, 4  [6] Edwards, C. et 
al., (2011) JGR, 116, E10 [7] Oshagan, A., et al., (2014) LPSC 
abstract #1791 [8] Kreisch, C., et al., (2015) this volume [9] Fer-
gason, R., et al., (2012) SSR, 170 [10] Johnson, J., et al (2014) Mars 
8 conf. abstract #1074 
 
 
Figure 1: (a) Context Imager (CTX) view showing Curiosity s traverse and areas for figures. (b) A portion of the HiRISE color mosaic of lower 
Mt. Sharp, with previously mapped units and features of interest indicated. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: (a) Regions from CRISM cube 
FRT0000B6F1 that are spectrally similarly the hematite 
ridge are shown in red and overlain on the color HiRISE 
mosaic.  Line 1 and Line 2 represent azimulong distance 
ChemCam passive spectral observation acquired by Curios-
ity on sol 467.  There is a very good agreement between 
locations of ChemCam passive spectra (b) that are con-
sistent with iron oxides (shown in red) and areas that are 
spectrally similar to the hematite ridge in the CRISM data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: (a,b) 2D scatter plots showing re-
gions that have similar properties in CRISM and 
TI datasets. (c) Locations of these endmembers 
on HiRISE color mosaic.  See text for full de-
scription. 
2124.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
