
2339.PDF
THE CHEMOSTRATIGRAPHY OF LOWER MT. SHARP: USING ROVER-SCALE OBSERVATIONS 
TO TEST ORBITAL-SCALE HYPOTHESES.  R. E. Milliken1, J. A. Hurowitz2, J. Grotzinger3, R. Wiens4, D. 
Blaney5, J. Martin-Torres6, M. Zorzano7 and the MSL Science Team. 1Dept. Earth, Evn., Planetary Sciences, Brown 
University, Providence, RI 02912; Ralph_Milliken@brown.edu, 2Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, 
3Caltech, Pasadena, CA, 4Los Alamos Natl. Lab, Los Alamos, NM 5JPL/Caltech, Pasadena, CA, 6CSIC-UGR, Gra-
nada, Spain, 7Lulea Univ. of Tech., Kiruna, Sweden. 
 
Background:  In September, Curiosity crossed a 
geologic boundary that put its wheels on strata that or-
bital-based mapping demonstrate are part of lower Mt. 
Sharp [1]. These rocks exhibit variable dust/soil cover, 
but it is clear from both rover and orbital imagery that 
there is a greater exposure of bedrock in this region 
than on the hummocky plains that dominated Curiosi-
ty s traverse path to the north. This is consistent with 
orbitally-acquired CRISM reflectance spectra that show 
these units to represent the stratigraphically lowest de-
tections of hematite and hydrated minerals in Mt. Sharp 
[2]. Curiosity now begins a journey in which orbital 
mineral detections and associated hypotheses can be 
assessed at the rover scale. 
This portion of lower Mt. Sharp (Pahrump Hills) 
consists of sedimentary lithologies that include 
mudrocks and sandstones. The apparent susceptibility 
of these units to eolian erosion is variable, with the 
stratigraphically lower beds being consistent with finer-
grained lithologies that erode to form shallow slopes 
and overlying units containing coarser-grained beds 
that form steeper slopes. At the ~18 m/pixel scale of 
CRISM data it is likely that the finer-grained, low-slope 
forming beds dominate the orbital spectral signatures 
due to greater areal exposure, and it is these units that 
have thus far dominated Curiosity s exploration of the 
Pahrump Hills (Fig. 1). 
CRISM signatures of strata equivalent to Pahrump 
Hills indicate the presence of hematite and one or more 
hydrated phases [2]. The former was confirmed (~8 
wt.%) in situ by CheMin XRD analysis of the Confi-
dence Hills drill target in the lower exposures of 
Pahrump [3]. Orbital signatures of the hydrous compo-
nent(s) are ambiguous enough that possible phases may 
include hydrated salts (e.g., jarosite, gypsum), clay 
minerals, and/or hydrated silica. Alternatively, the ob-
served metal-OH and H2O absorptions may be associat-
ed with XRD-amorphous components. 
Curiosity s initial traverse of the Pahrump Hills 
(Pass 1) focused on remote sensing (e.g., Mastcam im-
agery and ChemCam LIBS/RMI data). The subsequent 
Pass 2 traverse re-examined these strata with a focus on 
contact science (APXS chemistry and MAHLI imag-
ing). Curiosity s systematic documentation of chemical 
and textural trends as a function of stratigraphic posi-
tion can be combined with orbital CRISM data to sig-
nificantly enhance our understanding of how to inter-
pret orbital-scale observations in their proper context.  
Specifically, detailed chemostratigraphic analysis 
using Curiosity s payload, coupled with textural infor-
mation from imaging, can help us determine which 
chemical/mineralogical signatures reflect variations in 
primary sediment composition versus diagenetic pro-
cesses. Such observations can be placed in stratigraphic 
context and understood in terms of process, which will 
in turn help us understand how best to interpret orbital 
data in Gale beyond the traverse path of Curiosity. 
Methods:  In increasing stratigraphic position, pri-
mary outcrops of the Pahrump Hills include Shoemak-
er, Confidence Hills, Pink Cliffs, Book Cliffs, Alexan-
der Hills, Chinle, and Whale Rock [4]. During Pass 1, 
ChemCam examined a variety of bedrock and diagenet-
ic targets within these outcrops, many of which were 
acquired as 10 or 5 point vertical rasters that ran per-
pendicular to bedding and/or laminations. Data for in-
dividual points were arranged in increasing stratigraph-
ic order. Points within an observation are evenly 
spaced, but the vertical and/or horizontal distance be-
tween different observations is variable.  
Corresponding RMI images showed that some 
points within individual observations were associated 
with diagenetic features (e.g., veins, nodules); these 
points were removed from our analysis such that the 
results reported here are considered to be the best repre-
sentation of bulk bedrock chemistry (including possible 
cementing agents) as observed by ChemCam. Oxide 
averages for each point were calculated by the Chem-
Cam team using the PLS1 routine [5] for Si, Al, Fe, 
Mg, Ca, Na, K and Ti. These oxide values were nor-
malized to sum to 100%. The resulting stratigraphically 
ordered ChemCam point measurments were examined 
individually and also passed through a 3-point moving 
average to reduce point-to-point variability and to high-
light dominant chemostratigraphic trends (e.g., Fig. 2). 
Individual elemental abundances and elemental ratios 
(e.g., to Si) were examined for comparison against 
APXS data acquired in similar stratigraphic units. 
 
 
Figure 1. Pahrump Hills as seen by Mastcam, with labels 
for major outcrops explored during Pass 1 & 2. Red points 
indicate Pass 1 locations. Courtesy NASA/JPL/MSSS. 
 
2339.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
In this study we focus on APXS bedrock targets that 
were brushed prior to analysis and diagenetic targets 
(e.g., nodules) that were either brushed or unbrushed. 
APXS oxide abundances were provided by the APXS 
team and the same oxides reported by ChemCam were 
normalized to sum to 100%. APXS was also used to 
assess variations in S, Cl, and Br abundance. 
Results:  Our chemostratigraphic analysis of 
ChemCam and APXS data indicate that major elements 
(Si, Mg, Fe, Ca, Na, K) vary to different degrees 
throughout the Pahrump section, with at least three 
chemically distinct rock types [6]. Notably, there is an 
apparent increase in Al, decrease in Si, and decrease in 
Fe in strata between Confidence Hills and Whale Rock 
that is observed by both instruments (e.g., Al/Si trend in 
Fig 2). The uppermost outcrop (Whale Rock) exhibits 
increased Ca, Na, Mg, Fe and decreased Si, Al, and K 
compared to underlying outcrops, consistent with an 
increased salt (sulfate or chloride?) abundance as sug-
gested by numerous light-toned veins and masses ob-
served in Mastcam and RMI images of these sand-
stones. As a whole, these data indicate that the Confi-
dence Hills drill sample is enriched in Fe and depleted 
in Si compared to most of the strata in this location. 
One possibility is that this is a reflection of the drill 
location containing a higher proportion of Fe-oxides. 
APXS data show that diagenetic features are in-
creased in Mg, Ca, S, and Cl relative to bedrock, sug-
gesting they contain a higher proportion of salts. Trends 
in these elements within bedrock targets are more vari-
able. Book Cliffs bedrock targets exhibit a pronounced 
increase in Cl and Br (Fig. 2) and yield high CIA val-
ues, but there is no corresponding increase in S. Indeed, 
bedrock targets exhibit poor correlations between Mg 
or Ca and S, whereas Mg and Cl are positively correlat-
ed. In general, abundance of redox sensitive elements 
such as Fe and Mn exhibit minimal variation between 
Confidence Hills and WhaleRock.  
Conclusions:  Major chemical trends observed by 
ChemCam are typically also observed in APXS data for 
stratigraphically equivalent targets (we note that 
ChemCam and APXS data are often not acquired on 
identical locations), though the former exhibit greater 
variability within the measured section. Strata with in-
creased Al/Si  may indicate increasing proportions of 
non-silicate components (i.e., salts), which would also 
be consistent with the observation that certain outcrops 
exhibit increases in Cl, Br, and S.  
The chemostratigraphy of Pahrump indicates pro-
portions of siliciclastic and cements/early diagenetic 
components likely vary, where the latter may result 
from near-surface evaporative processes or deeper 
basinal brines. Such processes are suggested by the 
presence of and relationship between light and dark-
toned  clasts  seen in MAHLI images of some targets 
(Fig. 3). These features are not observed in all outcrops 
and may be crystal growths associated with the in-
creased Br and Cl values seen by APXS.  
Absolute wt.% Fe is not highly variable, but orbital 
detections of hematite and the presence of significant 
amounts of Fe-oxides in the drill target suggest under-
standing the mineralogical host(s) of Fe will be im-
portant in assessing the habitability of this portion of 
lower Mt. Sharp. Hydrated salts may be responsible for 
the orbital CRISM signatures, and if confirmed by ad-
ditional in situ measurements this could imply that 
volumentrically minor diagenetic components may 
dominate spectral signatures in lower Mt. Sharp. 
 
References: [1] http://mars.jpl.nasa.gov/msl/news/-
whatsnew/ press release 11-Sep-2014; [2] Milliken, 
R.E. et al. (2010), GRL, 37, L04201; [3] http://mars.jpl. 
nasa.gov/msl/news/whatsnew/ press release 4-Nov-
2014; [4] Stack, K. et al. (2015) this conference; [5] 
Wiens et al. (2013) Spectrochim. Acta B, 82, 1-27; [6] 
Forni, O. et al. (2015) this conference.  
 
Figure 2. ChemCam and APXS chemostratigraphy of the 
Pahrump Hills. Al/Si is elevated in all middle units com-
pared to the Confidence Hills bedrock and drill sample. 
APXS Br and Cl data are also elevated in some of these 
strata, indicating salts may be important diagenetic phases, 
possibly contributing to orbital spectral signatures in lower 
Mt. Sharp. Vertical lines indicate drill sample values. 
 
 
Figure 3.  MAHLI 
image of Topanga 
target in Book 
Cliffs outcrop. 
Dark and light 
 clasts  are indica-
taed by black and 
white arrows, re-
spectively. These 
rocks also exhibit 
increased levels of 
Br and, to a lesser 
extent, Ca. 
 
2339.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
