
3012.PDF
STATISTICAL VARIABILITY OF CHEMCAM LIBS SPECTRA FROM GALE CRATER EXPLORATIONBY CURIOSITY (MSL) : CHARACTERIZING THE SOURCES OF UNCERTAINTIES. ric LEWIN1,Pierre BECK2, J r mie LASUE3, Sylvestre MAURICE3, Roger WIENS4, the ChemCam team and the MSL team.1ISTerre (OSUG : uJF-Grenoble & INSU.CNRS), Grenoble.FR (<Eric.LEWIN@uJF-Greno ble.fr > ) , 1IPAG,Grenoble,FR, 3IRAP, Toulouse.FR, 4LANL, Los Alamos.NM.USA.
Introduction: The huge spectra collection thatChemCam instrument [Wiens, 2012] has acquiredsince Curiosity landed at Gale crater contains a wealthof informations that are hard to decipher in detailsbecause of the rather high number of phenomena thatinfuence these spectra. However, the reproducibility ofthese spectra in similar conditions looks quite good.This work is therefore aimed at identifying situationsof good reproducibility, permitting afterwards to defnequantitatively the level of instrumental reproducibilityusing the thus selected spectra subsets.
We start at the lowest level of the measurementproduction. We will frst focuss on a few typicalmeasurement sequences for which the targettedmaterial is a priori relatively homogeneous. Amongthese potential targets are the ChemCam calibrationtargets, the drill tailings from the differentMSL/Curiosity drill operations, and some identifedfne-grain soils. On these geological targets, aChemCam measurement sequence consists usually in asmall series of laser shooting locations, and on eachlocation, in a series of laser shots, typically 30, forwhich each individual plasma has been analysed by thespectroscopic part of the instrument, threespectrometers eahc with 2048 channels giving threewavelength ranges each with its own spectralresolution.
Available on the Planetary Data System, eachacquired spectrum is presented with different levels oftreatment [Maurice, 2012]. EDR fles give the rawvalues, as measured, which are unnormalizedintensities versus channel numbers. An automatedprocessing chain permits to denoise, to remove the socalled continuum and fnally to realign the spectra. Thedenoise operation permits to improve the statisticalaspect the spectra. The continuum-removing operationaims at separating the continuum part (black bodyradiation and other fner physical phenomena) from thefuorescence part which consists in the series of all theindividual spectroscopic lines corresponding to atomicor eventually molecular electronic transitions in thecooling plasma. The third operation consists inrealigning these spectroscopic lines with a reference,and therefore calibrating the abscissa from channelnumbers into wavelengths. This is necessary since theChemCam spectrometers are sensitive to Curiosityinternal temperature, which varies signifcantly. The
resulting spectra outing the low-level chain oftreatment are named RDR ones. The last low-leveltreatment consists in correcting for differential opticalinstrumental "transparency" and sensitivity, relativelyto wavelengths by applying a so-called optical transferfunction. The resulting spectra are named "CCS" ones.
In order to assess the variability of the spectra atthe lowest level, we need to treat with EDR fles.However to permit the comparison between spectrameasured in different operation sequences, thespectroscopic line realignment is necessary. Eachindividual EDR spectrum is therefore realigned usingthe exactly same transformation that was done in theautomatic treatment chain, however without thedenoise and the continuum removal. Mathematicallythis looks like changing the absissa graduation withoutmodifyong the ordinate values. The new set, furthercalled the RAL ones (ReALigned), is statisticallystudied, and compared through the same statisticaltools with the RDR and CCS sets.
The frst statistical tool used for this is therelationship between mean values and dispersions.When applied to a sequence of shats from a singlelocation, the difference of relationship for RAL spectrarelative to those RDR of CCS shows that the statisticallaw for the line intensities is different from the one forthe continuum. In particular, the former showschematically a simple proportionnality between meanvalue and standard deviation.
Another approach is to recourse to the so callANOVA, analysis of variance. Because of theomnipresence of martian dust other all measuredsurfaces, it has been shown [Meslin, 2013] that, for aseries of shots at a given location, the few frst spectradiffer from the remaining ones. The simplestapplicatiojn of ANOVA to two subgroups ofmeasurements permits to consider the partitionning ofthe variance (square of the standard deviation, and anadditive parameter) for the whole set, in three parts, thetwo respective variance for each subset, and the sacalled inter-variance, resulting from the differencebetween the respective means of each subset.Application of this ANOVA technique between the fvefst shots and the remaining ones, along the wholespectral range, shows once more a very constratedbehaviour between the RAL spectra, with a partitionindependant of the wavelength for most of them except
3012.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
a small subset of spectroscopic lines, and the RDR orCCS spectra, where no simple logic seems to emergefrom this analysis.
The last statistical tool presented is to look at thestructure of the correlation matrix and how this relatesto the known physics of spectra as well as
geochemistry, namely by refnding in the statistics, thechemical lines and eventualy some of the geochemicalso-called correlations such alkaline behaviour (Na &K), or the mafc one (Fe & Mg).
3012.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
