 Ni IN THE SOIL OF MARS: A CHRONOMETER TO MEASURE THE GLOBAL SOIL PRODUCTION RATE AND IMPLICATIONS FOR EXOBIOLOGY. G. J. Flynn, Dept. of Physics, SUNY-Plattsburgh, Plattsburgh, NY 12901 (FLYNNGJ@splava.cc.plattsburgh.edu). The continuous, global accretion of interplanetary dust onto the surface of a planet or moon can provide a geological chronometer, useful in determining the local and/or global rates of surface erosion, deposition, and weathering.  In the terrestrial case, the element Ir, which is present in high concentrations in chondritic meteoritic material but present in very low concentrations in terrestrial surface rocks, provides a convenient monitor of the fraction of meteoritic material in a soil or sediment.  As interplanetary dust mixes with finegrained terrestrial material the meteoritic fraction is determined by the ratio of the interplanetary dust addition rate and the rate of production of indigenous material into which that dust is mixed.  Since the interplanetary dust accretion rate onto the Earth is known, the Ir concentration in a terrestrial sediment is used to determine the sedimentation rate. The current terrestrial accretion rate of interplanetary dust, measured by impacts onto the LDEF satellite, is ~30,000 tons/year [1], mostly by particles ranging from 10-7 to 10-4 grams.  The meteoritic mass contributed by larger objects (up to ~1012 grams) is inconsequential in comparison to that of the small dust particles [2]. Thus, except in layers where deposition from a major impact interferes, the meteoritic fraction is dominated by the accretion of interplanetary dust. Comparison of the chemical composition of Lunar rocks with that of Lunar soils demonstrated a significant excess of volatile and siderophile elements in the soils in an abundance pattern consistent with the addition of a meteoritic component of carbonaceous chondrite composition [3].  Anders et al. [3] inferred a meteoritic fraction of about 2% in the Lunar Mare soils.  Applying the same technique used to determine the sedimentation rate of terrestrial sediments to the Lunar case, we can infer the production rate of indigenous Lunar soil from the meteoritic fraction and the accretion rate of interplanetary dust onto the Moon. The interplanetary dust flux at the Moon is estimated to be ~1/3.4 times the Earth flux, based on a comparison of dust detector measurements on Earth-orbiting Explorer [4] and Lunar Orbiter [5] spacecraft.  Adjusting the terrestrial accretion rate of interplanetary dust to the Moon gives an accretion rate of about 21 kg/m2.by.  A 2% meteoritic fraction then suggests a global soil production rate of about 1050 kg/m2.by.  This implies a regolith production rate of about 1 meter/by for a regolith density of 1 gm/cc, a Lunar regolith production rate in accord with that estimated using other techniques. Flynn and McKay [6] suggested applying the same technique to Mars.  They suggested: 1) the average meteoritic concentration in the soil should provide an indication of the global soil production rate, 2) differences in the meteoritic concentration from site to site might provide information on the local soil transport and deposition rates, and, 3) the meteoritic depth profile in the polar ice caps could provide information on the time-history of their deposition and vaporization. Ni Indicator: Since there is little hope of measuring Ir in the Mars' soils on the initial exploration missions, Flynn and McKay [6] suggested using Ni as a monitor of the meteoritic concentration.  The carbonaceous chondrite meteorites contain 1.1% Ni, while typical basalts have very low Ni concentrations.  In particular, the SNC meteorite Shergotty, believed to be from Mars, has  a Ni concentration of ~80 ppm [7], and most of the other SNC meteorites have similar concentrations. Only Chassigny and ALHA 77005 have significantly higher Ni contents, both about 300 to 400 ppm [7], still well below the Ni content of chondritic meteorites. The meteoritic fraction (Fmeteoritic) in the soil of Mars can be derived from measurements of the fraction of Ni in the soil (Fsoil) and the rocks (Frock) and the fraction of Ni in the interplanetary dust (FCI = 0.011), where: Fmeteoritic  =  (Fsoil -  Frock)/( FCI - Frock)      (Eq. 1) Global Soil Production Rate: The similarity of the soil compositions at the two Viking landing sites, the Pathfinder landing site, and the regions measured from orbit by the Phobos spacecraft suggests the soil on Mars is generally globally well mixed.  The accretion of interplanetary dust is also a global phenomenon. Thus, the meteoritic fraction in the soils of Mars is, to first-order, a measure of the global soil production rate. The X-ray Fluorescence chemical analysis instruments on the two Viking landers were unable to detect Ni in the soil of Mars, however the Alpha Proton X-ray (APX) spectrometer on the Mars Pathfinder apparently had sufficient sensitivity to detect Ni in at least some of the soil samples.  Although the initial publication of the Pathfinder APX results [8] contains no Ni abundance measurements, the Preliminary Results from the APX spectrometer reported on the Mars Pathfinder website indicate that Ni was detected in the A-5 soil at 0.1 wt%, but Ni was not detected in the two other soil samples reported. Neither of the two rock samples were reported to have detectable Ni.  While these preliminary results only provide the hope that the APX measurements will allow an inference of the Mars global soil production rate, we can use the Pathfinder APX preliminary results to illustrate the calculation and explore the potential implications. If the Ni fraction in the soil is taken as 0.00033 (the average of 0.1% and the two zero values), and the Ni fraction in the rock is taken as the Shergotty value (0.000008), then Equation 1 gives a meteoritic fraction of 0.03 = 3%.  Flynn and McKay [6] have modeled the meteoritic fraction in the soils of Mars, using the measured terrestrial flux, which they extrapolated to Mars, and estimates of the global weathering rate.  A 3% meteoritic fraction in the soils falls within the 2% to 29% range derived from their modeling [6]. The interplanetary dust flux at Mars has not been measured, but the flux of ~10 micron size interplanetary dust was measured in interplanetary space at 1.6 AU by the Pioneer 10 and Pioneer 11 spacecraft, and found to be roughly the same as that in interplanetary space at 1.0 AU [9].  As a first approximation, the interplanetary dust flux at Mars would be slightly larger than at the Moon, because of the greater degree of gravitational focusing by Mars.  Thus, to first order, a 3% meteoritic component in the Mars soil would imply a longNi IN THE SOILS OF MARS: G. J. Flynn term, global soil production rate of ~1.0 to 1.5 meters/by. This is in accord with an estimation by Arvidson [10] that the preservation of small bowl-shaped craters at the Viking 1 landing site implies a rate of rock breakdown of only meters per billion years in the current era. Exobiology Implications: A 3% meteoritic component in the soils of Mars would have significant implications for the interpretation of the constraints imposed by the negative results of the life science investigation conducted by the Gas Chromatograph Mass Spectrometers (GCMS) on the two Viking landers.  The Viking GCMS experiment provided an apparently unambiguous negative result in the search for present or past life in the Martian soils.  No detectable organic material was found by the GCMS in the four Martian soil samples, one from the surface and one subsurface at each of the two Viking lander sites, analyzed [11].  However, the Viking GCMS failed to detect the organic matter contributed by interplanetary dust. Using the laboratory version of the Viking GCMS, Biemann et al. [11] report a detection limit of 0.5 ppb for naphthalene at the Viking 1 site and 0.015 ppb at the Viking 2 site. If the concentration of naphthalene is the same in the interplanetary dust as in the CI carbonaceous chondrite they examined, they established maximum meteoritic fractions in Viking 1 and Viking 2 soils of 0.05% and 0.0015% respectively. Flynn and McKay [6] indicated these limits were inconsistent with their modeling of the magnitude of the interplanetary dust contribution to the soils, and suggested the result implied that organic matter contributed by interplanetary dust to the soils analyzed by the GCMS must have been destroyed rapidly by Martian surface processing. The limits on the meteoritic component of the Mars' soils inferred from the GCMS measurements at the Viking sites are much lower than the ~3% inferred from the Ni concentration in the Pathfinder preliminary results. The interplanetary dust particles recovered from the Earth's stratosphere have carbon concentrations averaging 10 to 12 wt% [12, 13], about 3 times the carbon concentration in CI carbonaceous chondrites. Furthermore, Clemett et al. [14] have detected polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in these IDPs, and Flynn et al. [15] have detected C-H stretching vibrations in the infrared absorption spectra of IDPs suggesting the organic matter in the IDPs is somewhat similar to that in the Murchison carbonaceous chondrite.  Thus, the detection of a substantial Ni excess in the soils would imply that the organic matter being added to Mars by the accretion of interplanetary dust in the present era must be undergoing rapid destruction, probably resulting from either the high redox potential of the Mars soil as discussed by Banin [16] or the high flux of ultraviolet light at the surface as discussed by Stoker et al. [17]. Presumably, indigenous organic matter would also be destroyed quite rapidly.  Thus, the Viking GCMS may have measured only soils in which any organic component had been destroyed by the current, harsh Martian environment. In an earlier era, when the surface conditions on Mars may have been less severe, the organic matter contributed by interplanetary dust might have survived.  In the terrestrial case, modeling by Anders [18] indicates that the accretion of interplanetary dust contributed significant quantities of prebiotic organic matter, which may have been important to the development of life on the early Earth.  Mars is a more favorable site for the unaltered accretion of interplanetary dust because of its lower surface gravity and larger atmospheric scale height [6]. Modeling indicates that interplanetary dust contributes an even higher surface density of pre-biotic organic matter to the surface of Mars than to the Earth [19]. Thus, detection of a Ni excess in the Mars' soil would provide evidence of substantial accretion of meteoritic material, suggesting the possible importance of interplanetary dust as a source of organic matter on the early surface of Mars. Conclusions: If the Ni content of the soils at the Pathfinder landing site averages near the 0.033% level and if the Ni content of the rocks is near the Shergotty value, then: 1) the meteoritic fraction of the Mars soil is about 3%, confirming the modeling by Flynn and McKay [6], 2) this meteoritic component almost certainly included a significant amount of organic compounds which, in an earlier era when surface conditions were less severe, could have been an important resource for any development of life early in the history of Mars, 3) the Viking GCMS negative results on organics in the soil of Mars provide no significant constraint on past life on Mars since the failure to detect meteoritic organics demonstrates that, in the present era, organics near the surface of Mars are destroyed rapidly, and, 4) the global soil production rate on Mars in the modern era is constrained to be ~1 to 1.5 meters/billion years. The potential utility of the Ni content of the Mars soil as a chronometer, to monitor the global soil production rate as well as local soil transport and mixing rates, coupled with the importance of the Ni abundance to the interpretation of Mars exobiology demonstrates the necessity of designing future Mars survey spacecraft with the objective of determining the Ni abundances in the soils and rocks. References: 1) Love, S. G. and Brownlee, D. E., Science, 1993. 2) Kyte, F. T. and Wasson, J. T., Science, 232, 12251229, 1986.  3) Anders, E. et al., The Moon, 8, 3-24, 1973. 4) Naumann, R. J., NASA TND-3717, 1-38, 1966.  5) Grew, G. W., and Gurtler, C. A., NASA TND-6266, 1-44, 1971. 6) Flynn, G. J. and D. S. McKay, J. Geophys, Res., 95, B9, 14,497-14,509, 1990. 7) Treiman, A. H. et al. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 50, 1071-1091, 1986. 8) Rieder et al., R., Science, 278, 1771-1775, 1997.  9) Humes, D. H. et al., J. Geophys, Res., 79, 3677-3684, 1974. 10) Arvidson, R. E., LPI Tech. Report 86-09, 9, 1986. 11) Biemann, K. et al., J. Geophys. Res., 82, 4641-4658, 1977. 12) Schramm, L. S. et al., Meteoritics, 124, 99-112, 1989. 13) Thomas, K. L. et al., Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 57, 1551-1566, 1993.  14) Clemett, S. J. et al., Science, 262, 721-724, 1993. 15) Flynn, G. J. et al., "FTIR Detection of Organic Carbon in Interplanetary Dust Particles," this volume. 16) Banin, A., LPI Tech Report 88-07, 35-36, 1988.  17) Stoker, C. R. et al., Lunar & Planet. Sci. XX, 1065-1066, 1989.  18) Anders, E., Nature, 342, 255257, 1989.  19) Flynn, G. J., Earth, Moon, and Planets, 72, 469-474, 1996. 
