 MARTIAN IMPACT GLASS: GENERATION AND EVIDENCE.  Peter H. Schultz and John F. Mustard; Geological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI  02912-1846 (Peter_Schultz@brown.edu) Introduction.  Pathfinder reflectance spectra revealed at least three distinct rock types on the Martian surface (1).  Surprisingly, however, even the freshest and darkest rocks did not exhibit the expected absorption bands previously recognized from orbital measurements (2, 3).  One explanation is that most of the exposed blocks are covered by dust or have developed a desert varnish.  Here we present evidence for an alternative interpretation: some (if not most) of the surface rocks represent impact products accumulated over the last 2 billion years since the formation of the outflow channels.  This alternative is based on direct comparisons with spectra of terrestrial impact melt products derived from terrestrial loess as well as expectations of impact melt production and dispersal through time. Pathfinder Dilemma.  Orbital (2, 3) and Earth-based (4, 5) spectral reflectance data of pristine dark surface materials on Mars generally indicate a mafic to ultramafic composition, consistent with volcanic emplacement styles inferred from images.  Rigorous modeling of complex systems of several mineral components showed that the simplest acceptable fit between laboratory and orbital ISM data indicated that some of the low-albedo regions consisted of low- and high-calcium pyroxenes and ferric oxides (2). Consequently it was a surprise when Pathfinder spectra of individual rocks did not reveal the expected diagnostic pyroxene bands (1), even though the rocks exhibited the low albedo and vesiculation expected for basaltic material.  Moreover, preliminary chemical compositional analyses from the APX revealed unexpectedly high values of silica and potassium, thereby leading to the suggestion that some of these materials could be andesites (6).  One possible explanation for the chemistry was that some of the high normative feldspar contents might be impact melts although retention of volatile alkalis seemed problematic (6). Martian Impact Melts.  The presence of volcanic constructs, ridged plains, and spectral signatures of mafic materials lead to a perception that the Martian surface resembles the Moon but with a thicker covering of weathered soils, rather than impact-gardened regolith.  Yet large regions of Mars are covered by thick, easily eroded airfall deposits (loess), some as thick as 3-5 km (7, 8, 9).  Consequently, one of the most likely target materials will be loess-like deposits, perhaps overlaying mafic plains in certain regions but weathered fragmental impact-derived debris in the highlands or other sedimentary debris over broad regions. Because most terrestrial loess deposits are Quaternary in age, there has been little basis for considering impact products as a viable Martian analog.  Recent discoveries of at least two impacts into thick (100 m300 m) loess sequences of Argentina (10, 11), however, now allow comparing in greater detail the melt generation, compositions, survival, and spectral reflectance.  Impact melt products from Argentina are not simply dispersed tektitic glasses but are found as vesicular blocks as large as 2 m across (11).  These materials exhibit a wide range of morphologies from clast-rich blocks with small (< cm) vesicles to highly vesicular materials resembling a scoriaceous basalt.  Petrographic studies clearly indicate their impact origin with rapidly quenched high temperature polymorphs, including baddeleyite and diaplectic glass (e.g., 10, 11).  Microprobe analyses reveal a wide range of compositions with highly feldspathic interstitial glass characterizing the lower temperature products but more uniform compositions at higher temperatures. Silica content ranges from less than 50% to more than 65% (wt), whereas K2O levels range from 0.1% for high-temperature products to 2% for low-temperature feldspathic glasses.  Even higher K2O levels (5-10%) are observed for melts incorporating evaporitic substrates (11).  Carbonates, ferrous/ferric particulates, and mineral clasts are melted and mixed to yield a range of compositions, indicative of both temperature and substrate depth.  Although the loess is derived from reworked Cenozoic Andean volcanics, melting of ironbearing minerals within the loess darkens the impact glass relative to the bulk parent materials. There are at least six craters larger than 150 km (and 15 larger than 100 km) in diameter on Mars that post-date the early Noachian when Martian conditions were perhaps more clement (12).  Extrapolating the dispersal of impact glass on Earth to Mars predicts that the Martian surface should be littered with impact glass products (up to several meters in proximal areas or strewn fields), perhaps contributing to certain dark MARTIAN IMPACT GLASS:  P.H. Schultz and J.F. Mustard plains and mobile materials (12) consistent with spectra in certain regions (13).  The newly documented generation of large impact glass bombs derived from loess in Argentina increases the probability that such material could contribute to the population of vesicular blocks around small (1-10 km) craters locally, as at the Pathfinder landing site. Consequently, the Argentine impact glasses closely resemble materials observed at the Pathfinder (and Viking) landing sites: rounded, blocky, and even faceted shapes; vesicle-poor to highly vesicular appearance; mafic to andesitic compositions that can retain volatile alkalis; and a range of silica content depending on substrate and conditions of formation.  Perhaps most striking, however, is the close match with spectral reflectance data. Spectral Reflectance Comparisons.  The reflectance spectra of a range of impact glasses and substrate materials from Argentina were acquired with the NASA RELAB facility (for accurate, high quality reflectance spectra) and an ASD FieldSpec FR spectrometer outfitted with a 100 watt collumnated light source from Oriel for rapid investigation of sample surfaces and textures.  Though the ASD spectra have high precision and the general shape of the spectra  are accurate, absolute intensity of the spectra are less well controlled due to the measurement design.  The spectra from the fresh interiors and unaltered surfaces of the impact glasses exhibit a generally low reflectance (5-10%) and a neutral spectrum (e.g. few distinct features).  Absorption bands, when present, are broad (.600 nm FWHM) and weak (.10-20%).  With progressive oxidation or mixing with unmelted target loess, the reflectances increase and absorption bands associated with hematite begin to develop.  This progression is similar to that observed in Manacouagin impact melt rocks (14).  However the samples in that study exhibited well define mafic mineral absorptions due to the slow cooling of the thick melt sheet. In the 1.0 µm wavelength region, critical for mafic mineral identification, the unaltered and oxidized glasses all exhibit a flat to slightly negative continuum slope, virtually identical to the spectra observed at the Mars Pathfinder landing site (1).  The general shape in this spectral region is controlled by the ironbearing mineralogy.  Since there are no well crystalline phases in these glasses, they exhibit no distinct spectral features.  The broad, weak ferrous glass absorptions occur at longer wavelengths, and the short wavelength wing of this absorption is responsible for the slightly negative continuum slope between 0.75 and 1.0 µm.  With increasing presence of ferric oxides due to alteration, the 0.4-0.5 µm spectral region remains relatively dark while the 0.7-1.0 µm region shows an increase in reflectance, and the development of weak ferric oxide absorptions.  However, the 0.75-1.0 µm region continues to show the same weak negative continuum.  Spectra that exhibit a range of albedos with broadly similar spectral properties, but with a minor increase in ferric oxide absorptions with albedo characterize the properties of both the Mars Pathfinder landing site and the Argentina impact glasses. Conclusions and Implications.  The presence of impact glass whether locally as blocks at the various landing sites or more widespread similar to tektite-like strewnfields may provide a means to assess the weathering rates and styles on Mars through time.  Impact glasses on the Earth break down to clays within about 50 Ma depending on depositional environments.  Consequently survival of glasses on Mars over 23 by could help us to assess the evolution of this very different environment. References.  1) Smith, P.H. et al. (1997), Science, 1758-1765;  2) Mustard, J.F. et al. (1993), JGR, 98, 3387-3400;  3) Mustard, J.F. et al. (1997), JGR, 102, 25,605-25,615;  4) McCord, T.B. et al. (1982), JGR, 87, 3021-3032;  5) Bell et al. (1994), Icarus, 111, 106-123;  6) Reider, R., et al. (1997), Science, 17711774;  7) Francis, P. and Wood, C. (1982), JGR, 87, 9881-9889;  8) Schultz, P.H. and Lutz, A.B. (1988), Icarus, 73, 91-141;  9) Grant, J.A. and Schultz, P.H. (1990), Icarus, 84, 166-195;  10) Schultz, P.H. et al., (1994), Geology, 22, 889-892;  11) Schultz, P.H. et al. (1997), GSA Abstracts, Vol. 29, A78;  12) Schultz, P.H. (1994), Eos, 75, 406;  13) Merényi, E. et al. (1996), Icarus, 124, 280-295;  14) Morris, R.V. et al., 1995, JGR, 100, 5319-5328. 
