Microsoft Word - 1591NEW.RTF APPLICATIONS OF PWS OF PLANET-B FOR SURFACE PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF MARS AND ITS SATELLITES.   T. Okada, Div. Planetary Science, Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, 3-1-1 Yoshin-dai, Sagamihara, Kangawa 229-0022, Japan (e-mail:  okada@planeta.sci.isas.ac.jp). As new applications of an HF radio ionospheric sounder, the feasibility was studied to observe the physical properties of solid surfaces in Planet-B which will be launched to Mars in July, 1998. The system called PWS (Plasma Waves and Sounder) is originally developed to sound the structures and dynamics of martian ionosphere, but it has function of altimetry (ALT mode) to detect the echo from the solid surfaces. Analysis of travel times, intensities and temporal profiles of the echo will be applied for (1) global mapping of martian surface topography, (2) regional variation of radar reflectance associated with the martian surface composition, structure or regolith thickness, (3) surveying the martian subsurface structures, (4) detection of physical properties of the surface and even the overall average of martian satellites, and (5) exploring the ground water at specific sites. Introduction:  Physical properties of planetary surfaces are dependent on chemical composition and physical conditions, and influenced by both endogenous and exogenous processes they have undergone such as volcanisms, tectonics, impact processes, meteorological activities and depositions. The electromagnetic properties of rocks and soils from the Earth and Moon have been studied and formulated as functions of bulk density, humidity, and abundance of ferromagnetic minerals [1,2]. As proven during the Apollo 17 mission, the physical properties and structures of planetary surface and subsurface can be probed by HF radio pulses [3]. Here the possibilities of applications of the ALT onboard Planet-B are investigated in the following aspects: the surface soil condition, regolith thickness and composition, layered structures, amount of water, and geomorphologic roughness. Regional geological variation by evolved processes is expected since the measurements by APXS on Sojourner rover of Mars Pathfinder shows the diversity of elemental composition of rocks [4]. The similarity of composition of the soils to Viking landing sites suggests that the surface soils are deposits by eolian processes. It is also found that some areas are covered with regolith of cm scale. Half of martian impact craters have their lobate, layered ejecta blankets, whose origin is still controversial. The degree of compaction of soils may constrain the pattern formation whether liquid water is responsible or not. Southern Amazonis and Hellas planitias are the radar dark areas called "stealth" where no detectable radar echo is replied for several cm wavelength [5]. The echo profile of longer wavelength will help us understand the surface characteristics of the stealth regions. The electric properties are dramatically altered by presence of liquid water. Clifford [6] estimated existence of groundwater in relatively shallow depth, a few km below the surface. It appears difficult to probe even if it exists, but it is possible to detect at the exposed deep layers such as bottoms of craters and valleys. The temperature of ice-saturated regions at midlatitudes may occasionally allow liquid water sufficient to detect, but it may be highly regional phenomenon. A recent report of discovery of evidence of past life in meteorite, ALH84001, appeals the importance of exploring lives and places they existed or still exists [7]. HF sounder may play a role to detect the sites liquid water may exist. The martian satellites, Phobos and Deimos, are often considered as trapped asteroids. They would be classified as primitive C type. Threre is a debate on their internal structure to explain their low density; uncompacted aggregates or deposites, while rubble piles of compacted rock fragments. They may be characterized by the echo profile to constrain their origin. Overviews of PWS/ALT System:  The idea and instrumental techniques of the system have been proposed and introduced by Oya and Ono [8]. The system is composed of 4 wire-antennas plus preamplifiers, transmission and receiving system, and data handling system. One of functions is altimetry with center frequency of 9 MHz (33 m in wavelength), several times higher than the predicted plasma frequency of martian ionosphere. The bandwidth is 0.3 ms and the pulse repetition rate is 8 Hz, and the ranging resolution of topography is about 20 m. Electrical Properties of Martian Surfaces:  The electrical properties of the uppermost layers of martian surfaces obtained from the earth-based radar with much shorter wavelengths appear to be somewhat more variable than for the Moon, with dielectric constants ranging from 1.5 to 5 [9]. This reveals the regional variation of the surface conditions. With longer wavelength, the physical properties associated with composition, porosity and amount of water will be reflected as variation of dielectric constants. Among electrical properties, dielectric constant is dominantly affected by physical conditions from 1.5 to 3.5 for regolith, 4 to 7 for breccia, 6 to 12 for rocks, and 5 to Applications of PWS for Observations of Mars and the Satellites:  T. Okada 100 for clay. The electrical conductivity is dominated by the humidity, 1 S/m for moist clay but negligible for desiccated surfaces. The loss tangent is highly influenced by amount of ferromagnetic minerals and water, 0.01 to 0.1 for basaltic, 0.001 to 0.01 for andesitic, 0.1 to 1 for moist materials. Radar Echo intensities from the Surfaces and Subsurfaces:  Since the echo experiments in Planet-B will be performed with a few orders of longer wavelength than by earth-based radar observations, the echo from martian surfaces have information on the averaged electrical properties tens of meter depth, undisturbed by any surface scatters like rocks and boulders. Another importance is the high transparency for highly desiccated surface materials due to the estimated penetration depth of several 100 m or more [1-3]. Here the radar echo intensities from two-layer surface were calculated, which case is typical for basement with the deposits of regoliths, lavas, and for the existence of groundwater. Okada et al. [10] discussed the extreme cases with very thin and very thick upper layers relative to the radar wavelength. They reported that the surface layers of a few meter thickness does affect the reflectance. The fact suggests the regional variation in thickness, porosity and composition of regolith layers is detectable to give some constraints for debates such as origin of rampart craters and stealth regions. For thick upper layers, the composition remarkably affects the echo profiles. For basaltic composition, the echo from subsurface ranging tens to a hundred meter depth is detectable as the echo enhancement. But for more silicic composition, detection of subsurface echo from hundreds to even a few kilometers deep is expected. Basaltic areas are considered dominant for martian surface and the typical penetration depth is limited up to 100 m, in which depth the long-term existence of liquid water is unlikely. It appears difficult to probe the ground water, unless the groundwater flows transiently to some exposed regions such as bottoms of craters or valleys. Effect of Surface Roughness: The martian surface roughness should take influences the radar echo profiles. Okada et al. [10] pointed out the alteration of temporal profiles of the echo as functions of rms surface roughness and orbiter altitude. The echo from the rougher surfaces was found to have the slower rise time, as well as a little bit slower rise time would be observed at higher altitudes. With these relationships, the surface reflectivity will be obtained from the intensities and temporal profiles of the echo. Radar Echo Intensities from the Martian Satellites:  Although Phobos and Deimos may have chondritic composition, their surfaces appear so desiccated that the electric properties cannot be greatly different from martian basaltic surfaces, and basically the same discussions will hold for the martian satellites. So the echo will provide us with information on the overall reflectance, regolith thickness and composition, existence of clear dielectric boundaries. The origin of the satellites is still controversial and the physical properties may be possible to constrain it. The detection limit distance from the satellites with the system is estimated about 100 km for porous surfaces and 200 km for relatively compacted materials. There will be several chances for Phobos and a few chances for Deimos to perform the echo observations during the nominal observation phase, one Mars year. If the extended observation phases are possible, more chances will be expected. The constraints of their origin will give much contribution for general understanding of the primitive asteroids, because their similarity of shape, size, and taxonomic classes, as well as relatively low density, suggests that the martian satellites are trapped primitive asteroids. Acknowledgments:  I would like to thank Prof. H. Oya and Dr. T. Ono at Dep. Astron. Spac. Phys. of Tohoku Univ., Sendai 980-8578, to permit my participation of the Planet-B PWS team for scientific research from geological viewpoints; Prof. Mizutani for his introduction to start this research. This work was supported by JSPS Research Fellowship for Young Scientists. References:  [1] Campbell M. J. and Ulrichs J. (1969) JGR, 74, 5867-5881. [2] Strangway D. W. and Olhoeft G. R. (1977) Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., A285, 441-450. [3] Phillips R. J. et al. (1973) in NASA SP330. [4] Rieder R. et al. (1997) Science, 278, 17711774. [5] Muhlemann D. O. et al. (1991) Science, 253, 1508-1513. [6] Clifford S. M. (1993) JGR, 98, 10,973-11,016. [7] McKay D. S. et al. (1996) Science, 273, 924-930. [8] Oya H. and Ono T. (1998) Earth, Planets and Space (in press). [9] Pettengill G. H. et al. (1973) Icarus, 18, 22-28. [10] Okada T. et al. (1998) Earth, Planets and Space (in press). 
