MARS LANDING SITE SELECTION FOR SAMPLE RETURN.  R. Stephen Saunders1, Geoffry Briggs2, Michael Carr3, David Crown 4, Michael Duke5, Christopher McKay2, George McGill6, David Paige 7, Steven Squyres8 and James Zimbleman9. 1,Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109, 2NASA Ames Research Center, 3US Geol. Survey, 4U. Pittsburg, 5Lunar and Planetery Institute, 6U. Mass., 7UCLA, 8 Cornell Univ.,  9National Air and Space Museum. The process of site selection for the return of the first samples from Mars is driven by science and constrained by the Mars environment. This paper describes the process of collecting and focusing input from the science community. Some of the physical constraints that must be factored into the selection are also described. NASA has established a long-range strategic framework for Mars exploration. The Mars Surveyor Program will explore Mars along three thematic lines: (1)search for life, (2) understand climate history, and (3) map resources including geology and geophysics. The approach is traditional, completing global characterization with geophysical, geochemical and mineralogical maps of Mars from orbit. The next phase is to characterize and explore two sites using rovers that are capable of selecting samples of rock, soil and to land at one of the previously explored sites, collect a sample and return it to Earth. This strategy will be implemented in a series of missions that include a lander and orbiter in 2001 and in 2003 and the first sample return mission to be launched in 2004 with return in 2008. Site selection is a key to the success of the program. The science site selection could choose to first explore a region of ancient highlands that evidences subsurface hydrothermal mineralization. Alternatively, a site might emphasize somewhat later fluvial or lacustrine deposits that might have harbored life that appeared earlier. The actual landing site might be on the ejecta of a recent impact crater that has excavated fresh rocks. The MSP'01 mission to Mars is a pivotal mission. It marks the completion of the global characterization phase of Mars exploration and the beginning of the search for evidence of past martian life. The 2001 mission is comprised of an orbiter, a lander, and a rover. The 2001 orbiter carries a gamma ray spectrometer that will provide a global elemental map of Mars. This experiment completes the suite of global observations that was lost with Mars Observer. Also, the orbiter carries a high spatial resolution thermal emission spectrometer and imager that will map the mineral abundances at selected sites. The rover carries an integrated payload that will be used to explore the surface of Mars and select samples for return. The rover instrument suite is designed to assist the science team to explore and characterize a region of Mars as well as to select a variety of samples for return to Earth. It is expected that the lander will carry a set of instruments to test elements of in situ propellant production, characterize the soil and dust, and record the radiation environment at the surface of Mars. The Mars Program has established a science office that provides management support to an advisory structure to advise NASA and the Mars Program. The group that has been given the overall responsibility for Mars is an ad hoc group, the Mars Exploration Strategy Group (MESG). This group reports to the Solar System Exploration Subcommittee of the Space Science Advisory Committee. The Mars Science Office has the responsibility for establishing a process for selecting landing sites. The basic elements of the process are to: (1) Solicit broad community input. (2) The Project Science Group of a particular Project will be responsible for providing a landing site recommendation to the Mars Exploration Directorate (MED) and NASA for final approval that incorporates this input. To help support this process, the Mars Science Office has established the Mars Site Selection Steering Committee. This committee will formally be part of MESG. The Committee will assist the PSG in formulating a site recommendation that has the broadest community input and, if possible, consensus (i.e. shared accountability). The Committee has broad responsibility for considering issues of site selection for the Mars Surveyor Program. The recommendations and all supporting material will be presented to MESG by the Project Scientist and the Integrated Rover Payload PI, representing the PSG, before asking for final approval by the MED and NASA. The science selection of a landing site will be constrained by cost driven requirements placed on spacecraft design by the Martian environment. The basic requirements on the landing site for the Mars Surveyor 2001 mission are as follows: (1)  The landing site latitude shall be within the latitude region from 15°S to 30°N. (2)  The maximum elevation of the landing site with respect to the Mars reference ellipsoid (defined as a 6.1 mbar datum) shall be less than or equal to 2.5 km. All terrain within the predicted 3-sigma landing footprint ellipse must meet this requirement. The following is a summary of the top level considerations for landing site location. Rover: 30°N Lander power is not sufficient to deploy Rover until 50 days after landing. 0° - 15°N Rover lifetime and power is maximum. 15°S Rover power and lifetime is restricted. Lander: 30°N No Lander science for first 20 - 30 sols. 0° - 15°N Lander lifetime greater than 300 Earth days. 15°S Lander lifetime of about 200 Earth days. Note:  The Mission Requirement for Lander lifetime is 100 days. Landing Accuracy:  30°N Landing footprint 30 km end-toend (3-sigma). MARS SITE SELECTION  R. S. SAUNDERS ET AL. 15°N Landing footprint 25 km end-toend (3-sigma). 0° Landing footprint 15 km end-toend (3-sigma). 15°S Landing footprint 10 km end-toend (3-sigma). Landing Risk: Rock abundances similar to those found at the VL-1 site result in a probability of landing failure due to rock impact of less than 0.01. Rock abundances similar to those found at the VL-2 site result in a probability of landing failure due to rock impact of about 0.07. Dust storms are more likely in Southern hemisphere. Power considerations could be an important factor in site selection for the rover. On Mars, a latitude range of about 8° to 12° north provides the most uniform solar power throughout the year, and the greatest integrated power. Since power is a major constraint, this might provide a deciding factor between two sites with equal science potential. Landing accuracy is another important element. The 2001 mission will be demonstrating precision landing accuracy. If the landing accuracy were within the range of the rover, it could influence whether the project could go to a specific target or to a broad region of general interest. For example, one might be able to target to a feature like a scarp at 15° S, but only to a broad homogeneous target at 30° N. During the Mars Pathfinder mission, dust accumulation was observed on both the rover and lander solar panels. Solar panel energy production degraded by a factor of 0.2% per sol, apparently due to such dust accumulation.  Assuming this rate of degradation without other compensation, the Rover would 'die' after 5 months at any latitude.  A more detailed assessment of dust accumulation effects is currently underway. In summary, science considerations will be the primary factor in site selection. The collective wisdom of the NASA science community will be tapped to make the right decision. All of this will be constrained by the realities of the Mars environment. 
