Microsoft Word - 1568.D97 SOME POSSIBLE MINERALOGICAL TRACERS OF THE CLIMATE ON EARLY MARS.  David C. Catling, NASA Ames Research Center, Mail Stop 245-3, Space Science Division, Moffett Field, CA 94035-1000. INTRODUCTION. The climate history of Mars is of fundamental interest because it is inextricably linked with the planet's overall geochemical evolution and the much-debated question of possible life. Geological features on the surface of Mars seem to indicate an earlier epoch of hydrological activity during the Noachian period. Liquid water would require a larger greenhouse effect than present, most probably caused by a higher partial pressure of carbon dioxide, pCO2, of more than a few times 0.1 bar [1, 2, 3]. An alternative greenhouse gas is methane [4] but the amount required would imply a biological source of unlikely magnitude. These are theoretical considerations but how can we confirm an early, thick CO2 atmosphere observationally? If the so-called "warm, wet early Mars" explanation of surface geology is correct, the thicker atmosphere should have left definitive geochemical evidence. Geochemical evidence of past terrestrial atmospheres is locked up in sediments and evaporites [5, 6] and an analogous situation should exist for Mars. Indeed, Viking orbiter images show that many valley networks terminate in ponding basins where sediments would likely be deposited [7]. Similar photographic evidence exists for Martian evaporites [8]. Much discussion in the literature relates to possible isotopic tracers of the climate evolution [9] or the stability of surface minerals [10] but here we consider the nature of mineral deposits formed from aqueous solution at the surface in sedimentary basins. AQUEOUS WEATHERING. On early Mars, liquid water from precipitation or glacial melt would have consumed atmospheric CO2 to produce carbonic acid that reacts with surface silicate rocks. Because of abundant volcanism on early Mars, producing reduced gases and ferrous iron, it is plausible that the atmosphere was very low in oxygen, similar to the Precambrian terrestrial atmosphere. Under such conditions, the principal cations produced by weathering of typical Martian igneous rocks are Fe2+, Mg2+ and Ca2+; the principal anion is HCO3 -. In addition, the feedwater to a sedimentary basin would contain a concentration of silica (from dissolution of igneous rocks) close to saturation. This is unlike the case of contemporary terrestrial waters where silica is consumed by organisms such as diatoms and remains undersaturated. Ferrous iron is only stable in solution if the oxidation potential is low which is why the concentration of Fe2+ is negligible for present-day oxic terrestrial surface waters (with the exception of some acidic rivers near volcanoes). Under low oxygen conditions however, the concentration of Fe2+ relative to Mg2+ and Ca2+ is comparable to the stoichiometric proportion in the rock [11]. The hypothesis that ferrous iron can be dissolved out of bedrock on Mars by groundwater has recently been proposed as an interpretation of observations from the magnetic properties experiment on Mars Pathfinder [12]. CARBON DIOXIDE PARTIAL PRESSURE. In a low oxygen aqueous environment exposed to a Martian atmosphere of CO2, the most likely carbonate to precipitate initially from a solution produced by weathering of igneous rock (discussed above) is the most insoluble one: siderite (FeCO3). However, in the presence of dissolved silica, if an iron mineral precipitates, it will be siderite if pCO2 is high and one or more iron silicates if pCO2 is low. Fig.1 shows the stability regime for siderite and the simplest stable phase iron silicate (greenalite, Fe3Si2O5(OH)4). If, as climate models suggest, pCO2 was higher than ~0.1 bar, we would expect there to be sideritecherty sedimentary facies in Martian sedimentary basins; we would not expect greenalite-cherty. Fig. 2 shows the temperature dependence of the siderite precipitation as a function of the minimum required pCO2 where a hypothetical aqueous solution has been estimated assuming it is analogous to terrestrial ultramafic rock groundwater adjusted for low oxygen similar to the method of Ref. [13]. At 0°C, pCO2 ranges 0.10.9 bar depending on the content of the iron in the igneous rock from which the water composition derives. At greater temperatures, pCO2 must be higher. The stability field of siderite also depends on the sulfur content of the aqueous solution from which it precipitates and the oxidation potential. If the dissolved sulfur content is high (due to the input of dissolved volcanic gases, for example), the stability field of siderite decreases. Fig 3 shows the calculated dependence for various precipitates expressed as a function of total dissolved sulfur and electron activity for a nominal fixed pH of 6. Siderite forms in weakly reducing or oxidizing conditions and is favored at higher CO2. If the total dissolved sulfur is high, pyrite may form depending on the electron activity. Under more oxidizing conditions, iron hydroxide may precipitate -- a temporary phase which later turns into a stable oxide like hematite. SEDIMENTARY LAYERING AND EXPOSURE. The stratigraphy and mineral types formed depend on the ionic content of the feedwater into the basin and its temporal variation. However, eventually when the climate conditions become unfavorable evaporative concentration of the weathered igneous rock fluid produces an increasingly alkaline and saline solution resulting in a sedimentary sequence which for a typical solution would be siderite - ankeritic dolomite - calcite gypsum - evaporite salts. Consequently, carbonate deposits are likely to be sub-surface and hidden. Moreover volcanic outpourings of sulfurous gases into the atmosphere over geological time would react with surface carbonates producing sulfates. Similarly, the effect of photochemical oxidants over geological time could destroy ferrous compounds like siderite should they be present at the surface. Thus remote sensing of the surface is probably unlikely to reveal the most interesting carbonate minerals relating to the early climate and the lack of unequivocal remote sensing signals for carbonates is perhaps unsurprising. It is equally unsurprising that the sulfur content of today's Martian soil is remarkably high: without oceans this volcanic volatile has had nowhere else to go. IMPLICATIONS FOR EXPLORATION. Future exploration on the surface of Mars (such as a sample return mission or human exploration) should focus on sedimentary and evaporite basins: these are the places to search for vestiges of life as well as the past climate. Because deep drilling of rock cores is very impractical, buried sedimentary sequences are best accessed in a sedimentary basin within which an impact crater has thrown up rock from depth. Carbonates are likely to be closest to the surface at the perimeter of a concave sedimentary basin since in the final evaporative phases, highly soluble salts will pool at the center leaving carbonates exposed near the edge of the basin. Therefore the optimum site is where an impact crater lies close to the perimeter of a larger sedimentary basin. In the POSSIBLE MINERALOGICAL TRACERS OF THE CLIMATE ON EARLY MARS:  David C. Catling interior of the impact debris, it is possible that very ancient sedimentary material may be preserved which holds the clues to the climate at the time of deposition. CONCLUSIONS. Using aqueous equilibrium calculations, the possible deposition of silica, carbonates and silicates in a sedimentary basin fed by water from weather igneous rock in a thicker CO2 Martian atmosphere was discussed. The presence of pure siderite facies in a sedimentary basin would generally indicate pCO2 levels in excess of ~0.1 bar and may be used in future exploration to place limits on the atmospheric composition of early Mars. Other facies would provide information on the state of the atmosphere.  Greenalite-chert would indicate low levels of pCO2, pyrite would indicate high levels of dissolved sulfur perhaps associated with volcanism, and iron oxides may indicate a higher oxidation potential (although little about the atmospheric composition). Carbonate beds are likely to be buried and may be covered with heavily oxidized minerals. Nevertheless, sample return or in situ analysis of the debris from impact craters within sedimentary basins may offer the most practical approach to future exploration of deep ancient sediments. In this way, we may have some hope of addressing the issue of the nature of the ancient Martian climate and atmosphere on a direct observational basis. REFERENCES: [1] F. Forget and R. T. Pierrehumbert (1997) Science, 278, 1273. [2] J. F. Kasting (1997) Science, 276, 1213-1215. [3] Y. L. Yung and M. F. Gerstell (1997) Icarus, 136, 222-224. [4] C. Sagan and C. Chyba (1997) Science, 276, 1217—1221. [5] H. D. Holland (1984) The Chemical Evolution of the Atmosphere and Oceans, Princeton Univ. Press. [6] R. Krupp et al. (1994) Econ. Geol., 89, 1581-1598. [7] J. M. Goldspiel and S. W. Squyres (1991) Icarus, 89, 392410. [8] R. D. Forsythe and J. R. Zimbelman (1995) J. Geophys. Res., 100, 5553—5563. [9] B. M. Jakosky and J. H. Jones (1997) Rev. Geophys., 35, 1-16. [10] J. L. Gooding (1978) Icarus, 33, 483-513. [11] R. G. Burns (1993) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 57, 4555. [12] S. F. Hviid et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1768-1770. [13] R. M. Garrels (1987) Amer. J. Sci., 287, 81-106. [14] W. Stumm and J. J. Morgan (1996) Aquatic Chemistry, Wiley, New York. [15] Y. P. Mel'nik (1982) Precambrian Banded Iron Formations, Elsevier, New York. Fig.1. Siderite-greenalite equilibrium in association with dissolved silica at 25°C showing the dependence on pCO2. Based on Gibbs free energy values for precipitates (not the crystalline forms) taken from Refs. [14, 15]. Fig.2. The minimum pCO2 required for siderite precipitation from a typical acidic solution derived from weathered ultramafic rock (with Fe2+~8x10-4 mol/kg) showing the dependence on temperature. Fig.3. The dependence of the equilibrium stability fields of iron minerals on the quantity of total dissolved sulfur and electron activity (pe) for pH=6. Calculations used Gibbs free energy values for precipitates at 25°C. Solid line: pCO2 = 0.1 bar. Dashed line: pCO2 = 1 bar. 
