INTERPRETATION OF MARS PATHFINDER AND VIKING SOIL AND ROCK GEOCHEMICAL RESULTS: A PHYSICAL VOLCANOLOGY PERSPECTIVE.  James W. Head1 and Lionel Wilson2, 1Dept. of Geological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912 James_Head_III@Brown.edu, 2Environmental Science Dept., Institute of Environmental and Natural Sciences, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YQ, U.K. L.Wilson@Lancaster.ac.uk. Introduction:  The development of physical volcanological theory for the ascent and eruption of magmas on Mars has provided a framework for the interpretation of landforms (e.g., lava flows, edifices), physical properties of magma products (e.g., lava flow surface textures, pyroclast size distributions), delivery and dispersal of materials (e.g., pyroclastic flow and fall deposits and their areal distribution), composition (e.g., rheological properties, yield strength, viscosity), and eruption rates [1].  Here we use this physical volcanology perspective to interpret Viking and the recent Pathfinder results on the chemical composition of martian soil and rocks [2, 3].  We conclude that: 1) basaltic andesite may be a common rock type on Mars (as it appears to be on the major Tharsis shield volcanoes), 2) pyroclastic fragmentation, which should be very common in the eruption of virtually any volatile-containing magma on Mars, can plausibly explain the enrichment of S and Cl of soils at the sites as primary volcanic gases associated with pyroclastic fragmentation (both directly delivered in ash particles and/or as aerosols), 3) a significant part of the fine material at the Pathfinder site can thus be interpreted as pyroclastic ash (perhaps subsequently moved by eolian processes), and 4) the mafic soil component could come from a) basaltic plinian eruption products [1], b) local basalt not sampled by Pathfinder, and/or c) weathering and eolian transport from more mafic surface units on Mars [4]. Pathfinder Results: The Mars Pathfinder mission landed at the mouth of Ares and Tiu Valles, a site selected because of the probability that a variety of rocks had been brought into the area by catastrophic floods from the adjacent ancient cratered uplands.  Among the goals of the mission were to address several important scientific questions such as differentiation of the crust, the development of weathering products, and the nature of the early martian environment and its subsequent evolution [2].  Aided by mobility provided by the Sojourner rover, information on the morphology [5], mineralogy [5], geochemistry [3], and physical [6] and magnetic [7] properties of the site was obtained.  These results could be compared with those obtained at the Viking landing sites [8].  The chemical composition of five rocks and six soils were measured at the Pathfinder site by the alpha proton x-ray spectrometer [3].  Soils were similar to each other and to those analyzed by Viking [8] (but slightly lower in S, similar in Cl, higher in Ti), but differed from the analyzed rocks.  Rocks were similar to each other but were unexpectedly high in silica and potassium compared with soils and martian meteorites, and were interpreted to be similar in composition to terrestrial andesites. In order to explain the soil composition, investigators [3] required the addition of a mafic component and reaction products of volcanic gases to the local rock material. Crustal differentiation of mantle-derived parent materials seems to be required by the high silica content of some of the rocks [2, 3].  One possibility for the formation of magnetic particles is titanomagnetite occurring in palagonite derived from a basaltic precursor [7].  We now explore the physical volcanology perspective on these findings. Presence of basaltic andesites and andesites:  Early observations of Mars shield volcanoes and lava flows revealed the presence of very long lava flows relative to the Earth and these were commonly interpreted to mean that the viscosity of the flows were very low and the effusion rates very high [9]. Later analyses showed that the dominant factors controlling flow length were effusion rate [10], and cooling and total volume limitations [11], not compositionally-related viscosity. The implied very high effusion rates were then linked to a gravity-related dependence of dike width (higher effusion rates by a factor of five might be expected as a result of the up to two-fold greater dike widths implied by lower gravity) [1, 12].  Lower gravity also causes cooling-limited flows to travel about 1.7 times further on Mars than on Earth for the same effusion rate, mainly because they are thicker for a given lava yield strength and substrate slope.  Taken together, these two factors imply that compositionally similar cooling-limited lava flows might be about six times longer on Mars than on Earth [1].  Although lava flow heat loss processes are such that no major differences between Mars and Earth are to be expected in terms of flow cooling rates and surface textures, the lower gravity causes cooling-limited flows to be longer, and dikes and vents to be wider and characterized by higher effusion rates.  For example, a Laki-type flow would have a typical length of 200-350 km on Mars; this would permit the construction of very large volcanoes of the order of 500-700 km in diameter.  Finally, rheological (viscosity, yield strength, and surface folding) analyses on a number of lava flows on martian shields showed that the range of properties extends from basaltic to andesitic compositions [1, 13], and that andesitic compositions might be a reasonable candidate for flows on some of the major shield volcanoes such as Ascraeus Mons. Major "festoon" folds forming ridges at ~100 m spacing arranged transverse to flow directions on flows extending many hundreds of kilometers from their sources are probably the result of distal cooling, leading to apparent viscosities in excess of 108 Pa s [14] (well into the andesite range).  In summary, while earlier analyses suggested that many of the flows on the major volcanic edifices might be more fluid basalts, more recent analyses show that basaltic andesitic and andesitic compositions are probably typical for numerous flows on these edifices.  Therefore, the findings of basaltic andesitic to andesitic compositions at the Pathfinder site are consistent with observations on many of the volcanic deposits on the younger Tharsis Montes and related volcanic deposits. Formation of pyroclastic ash and its distribution:   The combination of the lower martian gravity and lower atmospheric pressure means that both nucleation and disruption of magma occur at systematically greater depths than on Earth [1]. Grain sizes in martian hawaiian eruptions should be at least an order of magnitude finer than in terrestrial equivalents because of the enhanced magma fragmentation on Mars.  DifMARS SURFACE COMPOSITION:  J. W. Head and L. Wilson ferences in the atmospheric pressure and temperature structure cause martian plinian eruption clouds to rise about 4 to 5 times higher, for the same eruption rate, than terrestrial clouds.  Essentially the same relative shapes of eruption clouds are expected on Mars as on Earth and so the cloud-height/depositwidth relationship should also be similar.  This implies that martian fall deposits may be recognized as areas of mantled topography with widths in the range several tens to a few hundred km.  A consequence of the lower atmospheric pressure is that martian plinian deposits of any magma composition will be systematically finer-grained than those on Earth by a factor of about 100, almost entirely sub-cm in size.  Basaltic plinian eruptions, rare on Earth, should be relatively common on Mars.  In fact, plinian eruptions are plausible for any magma, including ultramafic or komatiitic, that exsolves 0.01 wt % (~100 ppm) volatiles.  The production of large-scale plinian deposits thus does not necessarily signal the presence of more silicic compositions, but rather may be linked to the enhanced fragmentation of basaltic magma in the martian environment, or the interaction of basaltic magma with ground water.  Pyroclastic flow formation is clearly inherently more likely to occur on Mars than on Earth, since eruption cloud instability occurs at a lower mass eruption rate for a given magma volatile content [1].  For a given initial magma volatile content, eruption speeds are a factor of at least 1.5 higher on Mars, and so the fountains feeding pyroclastic flows will be more than twice as high as on Earth.  Pyroclastic flow travel distances may be a factor of about three greater, leading to values up to at least a few hundred km [1].  In summary, for eruptions on Mars (relative to Earth), these factors favor: 1) production of relatively higher proportions of pyroclasts, 2) formation of relatively much finer grain sizes of these pyroclasts, and 3) the much broader dispersal of materials in convecting eruption clouds [1, 15].  All of these factors mean that the martian surface should be characterized by an abundance of volcanic ash that is very fine grained and very widely dispersed by primary volcanic dispersal processes.  Thus, one should expect contributions of volcanic ash in soils virtually everywhere on Mars [15], especially considering the additional mechanism of eolian transport of fine material. Composition of pyroclastic ash:  Any erupting magma on Mars exsolving a volatile species with a solubility that is relatively high (e.g. SO2, which has a solubility closer to that of H2O than to that of relatively insoluble CO2) will erupt explosively (i.e. the magma will fragment just before reaching the surface) if the total volatile content is greater than about 0.01 weight % (i.e. 100 ppm) [1, Table 3]. The activity will be more vigorous (i.e. have a higher eruption speed in the vent) than that of typical terrestrial Hawaiian lava fountains if the gas content exceeds about 0.1 weight % (i.e. 1000 ppm). These figures apply if the martian atmospheric pressure is ~600 Pa; for eruptions at the summits of significant volcanic edifices even less of the volatile is needed to drive vigorous explosive eruptions. Because of the dispersal and enhanced cooling in the atmospheric gas entrained into the cloud, more pyroclasts will cool rapidly to glass and all pyroclasts should have bubbles of gas in them.  If the erupted pyroclasts stay hot long enough to come to complete equilibrium with the martian atmospheric pressure, then at a pressure of 600 Pa only about one part per million of the original volatile component is retained in the pyroclasts in trapped gas pockets. However, if the pyroclasts chill soon after fragmentation, then as much as one quarter of the original volatile inventory could be retained in pressurized gas-filled vesicles. The actual amount of gas retained in this way is likely to be significantly less than this, however - perhaps of order one tenth of the original total volatile content.  The vast majority of the magmatically released gas is emplaced into the atmosphere as highly mobile aerosols [16].  The pyroclasts will also be dispersed widely [1; Figure 20] with 100 micron-sized particles being easily carried 1000-5000 km from the vent.  Thus, there are two mechanisms of widespread dispersal of magmatic volatiles on Mars (vesicles in very fine-grained pyroclasts, and in aerosols).  In addition, because only a small amount of volatiles is necessary to cause magmatic disruption and plinian eruptions on Mars, basaltic plinian and even ultramafic plinian eruption columns are very plausible.  Therefore, pyroclastic eruptions provide a mechanism for widespread and relatively homogeneous dispersal of both volatile constituents and ash potentially rich in Fe and Mg.  Water in gas in pyroclastic vesicles will ensure the further alteration of these fragments upon deposition. Summary and Conclusions:  The characteristics of the rocks and soils at the Viking and Pathfinder sites on Mars are viewed in the context of martian volcanic eruption conditions [summarized in 1].  Although numerous explanations are possible, martian volcanic eruption conditions provide a plausible explanation for the main aspects of the chemistry of rocks and soils at these sites: i.e., basaltic andesitic and andesitic compositions seen at the sites appear to be a common volcanic eruptive rock type on Mars, and the enrichment in S and Cl of soils at the sites can be attributed to primary volcanic gases associated with pyroclastic fragmentation or aerosols.  A significant part of the fine material at the Pathfinder and Viking sites can thus plausibly be interpreted as pyroclastic ash (perhaps subsequently moved by eolian processes).  The mafic soil component could come from 1) basaltic plinian eruption products [1], 2) local basalt not sampled by Pathfinder, and/or 3) weathering and eolian transport from more mafic surface units on Mars [4]. References: 1. L. Wilson and J. Head, Rev. Geophys., 32, 3, 1994. 2. M. Golombek et al., Science, 278, 1743, 1997. 3.  R. Rieder et al., Science, 278, 1771, 1997. 4. J. Mustard and J. Sunshine, Science, 267, 1623, 1995; J. Mustard et al., JGR, 98, 3387, 1993; JGR, 102, 25605, 1997. 5. P. Smith et al., Science, 278, 1758, 1997. 6. Rover Team, Science, 278, 1765, 1997. 7. Hviid et al., Science, 278, 1768, 1997. 8. B. Clark et al., JGR, 87, 10059, 1982; Banin et al., Mars, Univ. Arizona Press, 594, 1992. 9. M. Carr et al., 1977, JGR, 82, 3895. 10. M. Malin, Geology, 8, 306, 1980. 11. H. Pinkerton and L. Wilson, Bull. Volc., 56, 108, 1994. 12. L. Wilson and J. Head, LPS 19, 1283, 1988; L. Wilson and E. Parfitt, LPS 20, 1213, 1989. 13. G. Hulme, GJRAS, 39, 361, 1974; G. Hulme, Icarus, 27, 207, 1976; H. Moore et al., PLPSC 9, 3351, 1978; J. Zimbleman, 1985, JGR, 90, D157, LPS 16, 932, 1985; P. Cattermole, JGR, 92, E553, 1987; S. Fagents and L. Wilson, LPS 21, 341, 1990. 14. E. Theilig and R. Greeley, JGR, 90, E193, 1986. 15. J. Head and L. Wilson, LPSC 29, this volume; L. Wilson and J. Head, LPSC 29, this volume. 16. M. Settle, JGR, 84, 8343, 1979. 
