MARTIAN BRINES AND EVAPORITES:  EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES.  Jeffrey M. Moore1, Mark A. Bullock2, Michael T. Mellon2, Aaron P. Zent1, and Clayton L. Woosley1, 1NASA Ames Research Center, MS 245-3, Moffett Field, CA 94035 (jmoore@ringside.arc.nasa.gov),  2LASP, CB 392, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 80309-0392. Introduction.  Evaporite deposits may represent significant sinks of mobile anions (e.g. Ca2+, Na+, Mg2+, Fe2+) and cations (e.g. CO32-, NO32-, NO2-, SO42-, SO3-, Cl-) among the materials composing the martian surface and upper crust.  Carbon and nitrogen are especially interesting because of their role as atmospheric gases which can become incorporated into crustal rocks.  The nature of evaporite-precursor brines formed under martian conditions is poorly understood. Our laboratory studies investigating the formation of brines will greatly aid in improving our understanding of both the fluids and their precipitates (evaporites). To date, only a very limited number of laboratory investigations have been conducted which have any bearing on a better understanding of various processes related to brine or evaporite formation on Mars (although there is a respectable body of work on terrestrial brines, evaporites, and mafic rock-water chemistry).  Moreover, attempts at modeling "warm, wet Mars" alteration and precipitate mineralogies would enormously benefit from laboratory data of the type we discuss here. experiments are twofold.  The first is to investigate the formation of brines on Mars by determining the identity and production rate of water-soluble ions that form in an initially pure liquid water in contact with Mars-mixture gases and unaltered Mars-analog minerals.  We are considering the products of the initial alteration of primary mafic minerals as would be found in a closed, juvenile ground-water system.  We investigate the rates of dissolution and concentration of interacting ions over a one year time scale.  Our second objective is to characterize the suite of evaporites deposited when aliquots of the brines formed in the first part of the experiment  are concentrated under different conditions. Approach and Experimental Technique. Laboratory experiments are being conducted to determine the identity and production rates of water soluble ions which may be formed under present and past martian environmental conditions.  The resulting brines will be used for the generation of evaporite products, which will be analyzed to determine their chemistry and mineralogy.  Comparisons of the experimental results will be made to various existing models of martian climate evolution and surface characteristics as modified by incoming spacecraft data. The implications of the exact composition of Martian evaporite deposits are fairly important for understanding the evolution of Mars' climate.  For example, Ca and Mg carbonates, which are thermodynamically stable on Mars today [1], are unstable in the presence of SO2 [2].  On the other hand, theoretical modeling of likely precipitates indicates that dolomite (CaMg(CO3)2) should be the primary carbonate precipitate upon evaporation of model martian groundwater in contact with martian basalt [3].  Volcanism in Mars' past was almost certainly responsible for producing atmospheric SO2, complicating the picture for carbonate formation and stability.  Similarly, volatiles derived from volcanic activity, such as HF, HCl and H2SO4 would have profound effects on the nature and stability of SO4 and Cl salts, both detected in large abundances by the Viking landers [4].  Although gypsum (CaSO4.2H2O) is the major SO4 precipitate from theoretical modeling [3], and is a likely product from the weathering of martian basalt due to volcanic gases [5], its presence as the major martian sulfate has been deemed theoretically unlikely [4]. To generate brines, samples of unaltered mineral mixtures, which are thought to represent the rock in the upper martian crust were ground and mixed with water.  Individual pristine minerals were used to simulate martian rocks and have been chosen on the basis of SNC meteorite mineralogy [6].  The slurries were placed in an environment (pressure 1 bar, temperatures set a several values: 1째, 30째, and 50째 C) which represent the conditions within the martian subsurface where brines might reside. The atmospheric gases in the sample chambers were initially mixed to match the present composition of the martian atmosphere.  Individual experiments will have durations of up to one year.  Within a set of runs, specific samples are being collected after specific durations.  The individual sample durations have been chosen on the basis that most chemical reaction rates (including those that are grain-rind diffusion limited) decay exponentially with time.  At the end of the exposure, the identity and abundances of water soluble ions in the fluid are being determined, and the rock samples are examined for the presence of precipitates and weathering products. These and many other issues with respect to the intersection between martian climate and geochemistry will be greatly elucidated by results from our experiments.   The objectives of this new set of MARTIAN BRINES AND EVAPORITES:  EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES:  J M. Moore et al. Subsequent (2nd year) experiments will be conducted using a different gas mixture (CO2 70%, N2 12% CO 10%,, O2 5%, SO2 1%, NO2 1%, CH4 0.9%, NH3 0.1% at 1 bar) to simulate the hypothesized martian paleo-atmosphere.  3rd year runs will be performed on a vitrified Mars-analog rock mixture, to assess the effects of glasses on the formation of martian brines. A number of interesting results have emerged from the pilot run.  In the ion analysis of the fluids, we obtained an SO3/Cl weight ratio of 2.4.  In contrast, the same weight ratio for soils at the Viking Lander sites is approximately 8.4 [8].  For the SNCs, this weight ratio is in the range of 0.1-1 [9].  This may suggest that Cl has been more mobile than S, or that evaporites on Mars have developed through complex recycling of brines and consequent fractionation.Dissolved elemental analyses are being performed by inductively coupled plasma optical emission (ICPOE) and graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrophotometry (GFAA).  These analytical techniques provide detection at the ppm level, sufficient for tracking the rates of dissolution of ions over the one year duration of the experiments. The weight ratio of CO2/SO2 in our pilot experiment was 5.1, which may be compared with estimates of approximately 4 for SNC meteorites [10]. The congruence of these results suggest that salts in SNCs may be consistent with the precipitation of brines formed by meteoric water interacting with rocks of roughly SNC composition. Evaporite Analysis.  For the brines studies, approximately 80 g aliquots of liquid will be used in chemical analyses of the dissolved ion load.  The solute load will be tracked over time, and is expected eventually to stabilize for most ions.  For evaporite analysis, the remaining 20 g of brine will be divided into four aliquots, and desiccated under simulated Mars atmosphere in one of four ways.  These are: Evaporation, rapid and slow, and freezing  rapid and slow.  Based on pilot-run experience, we calculate that we will have a significant fraction of a milligram of evaporites to analyze.  The mineral suites will be examined by infrared spectroscopy as well as by electron microscopy and powder X-ray diffraction for identification of the mineral components. Testability and Applicability of Results. Mars Pathfinder may have provided a data set that can be applied to the results of the laboratory experiments. Coherent rocks of any probable evaporite could likely be identified with a combination of APXS data and IMP imaging.  If evaporites are present only in the fines, their identification is more problematic.  In that case, mass balance calculations and laboratory data such as that proposed here might permit identification of the evaporites.  TES, aboard Mars Global Surveyor, is capable of detecting evaporite minerals such as sulfates. We will present initial results of this current experimental run. The matrix of brine compositions,  desiccation conditions, and evaporite mineralogy can be compared to the results of thermodynamic calculations of the equilibrium mineralogy from various models [3,7]. There are good reasons to make such comparisons:  1) Many thermodynamic constants are available only for standard conditions (25째C, 1 bar) and must be extrapolated to the appropriate conditions for Mars, introducing the possibility of error; 2) Thermodynamics predicts only the equilibrium assemblage that results from reversible processes. Rapid freezing and sublimation of H2O suddenly exposed to the martian environment may, in practice, produce a suite of evaporites quite different from that predicted in thermodynamic calculations. References.  [1] Fegley, B. and A.H. Treiman, Venus and Mars:  Atmospheres, Ionospheres and Solar Wind Interactions, 7-71, 1992.  [2] Clark, B.C., and A.K. Baird, Geophys. Res. Lett. 6 , 811-814, 1979. [3] DeBraal, J.D. et al., LPI Tech. Rep. 92-04 , 1992. [4] Clark, B.C., and D.C. Van Hart, Icarus 45 , 370378, 1981.  [5] Malin, M.C., J. Geophys. Res. 79 , 3888-3894, 1974.  [6] McSween, H.Y., Rev. Geophys. 23 , 391-416, 1985.  [7] Newsom, H.E. and J.J. Hagerty, LPI 916 , 62-63, 1997.  [8] Clark, B.C. et al., Science 194 , 1283-1288, 1976.  [9]  Gooding, J.L., Meteoritics 25 , 281-289, 1990.  [10] Gooding, J.L., Icarus 99 , 28-41, 1992. Pilot Experiment.  We have performed a pilot experiment in order to develop experimental protocols and test the analytical techniques.  This experiment was performed at room temperature with a limited number of reaction vessels and fluid extractions to test the feasibility of the full scale experiments described above. 
