Microsoft Word - 1524.D6 RECORDS OF MOLTEN MARTIAN SOIL IN EET 79001 METEORITE.     M.N.Rao, S.J.Wentworth 1, S.R.Yang 1and D.S. McKay.   SN4 / NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston. TX.77058 and  1) Lockheed Martin, NASA Road 1, Houston. Introduction  In Martian meteorite EET 79001, Lithology A contains "glassy" looking dark-brown pockets (or pods) and veins of shock-induced impact melts called Lithology C.  In one such "glass" inclusion, (,27), Bogard and Johnson (1) found a large abundance of noble gases with elemental and isotopic compositions similar to that of the Martian atmosphere, as determined by Viking experiments. During pyrolysis experiments on the same inclusion Gooding and Muenow (2) showed that Lith C contained most of the oxidized sulfur in dissolved or occluded form in melt "glass" even though some sulfur is present as sulfur-rich aluminosilicates.  These studies suggest that Lith C may contain vestigial records of Martian soil.  The present study is focused on major and minor element determination of impact melt glassy pods and veins (Fig.1) at different sites in EET 79001 Lith C.  Based on the observed excesses of sulfur and other elements in veins, we show that Lith C composition can be generated from a mixture of ~85% Lith A plus ~7% makelynite (plag) and ~8% Martian soil. Experimental   Quantitative elemental analysis (by both point analysis and raster beam analysis modes) of large glass pods and associated veins in thin sections ,77 and ,78 (parent ,27); ,8 and ,20 and ,153 (from other inclusions in Lith C) was carried out with the Cameca SX100 microbeam automated electron microprobe at Johnson Space Center (using 15 KV accelerating potential and 20 nA beam current) equipped with standard Cameca instrument controls and PAP reduction software.  Color image mapping for various elements was carried out in selected areas in veins and pods. Standard analytical methods are employed for determining 13 element oxides in the melt "glasses". RESULTS:   Spatial variations   The veins are about hundred microns thick and are relatively homogenous.  They appear to emanate from large glass pods.  Dendretic olivines and pyroxenes interspersed with ribbed/smooth glass are commonly present in pods.  But the impact melt in the vein has no such crystal growth indicating that it was rapidly quenched.  On the other hand, the vein shows fine granular and vesicle structure on sub-micron scale as revealed in our SEM studies.  The rims are more fine grained and uniform compared to the middle portion of the vein.  There is a high density of vesicles in the middle portion of the veins compared to the rim area in ,77 and ,78 sections.  Submicron-sized particles are present everywhere in the veins. These particles appear to be fluffy and diffuse in structure. Microprobe color maps for S, Fe, Mg, Ca, Al, Si, P, Ti ,Cl and Na were imaged to study the spatial distribution of these elements at different sites in the vein and the pod.  Sulfur maps show that tiny bright sulfur spots are present throughout the vein.  These bright spots are several microns in size and are very rich in sulfur compared to the neighboring region.  For some S-rich spots, we find correspondence between Fe and S while for many others, we do not find this correspondence.  Further, Ca and Al are not enriched in S-rich spots.  Note that sulfur contamination in EET 79001 Lith C due to Antarctic weathering is negligible as shown by (2) and (6). When we plot the data from raster beam analysis as a function of distance from the rim (i.e. the beam is rastered in 12um x 9 um steps consecutively along a line from one edge of the vein to the other) at different sites in the vein, we find two to four fold enrichments of sulfur in the central vesicular region of the vein compared to the rims.  Interestingly, we see no enrichment of Fe in the middle portion of the vein relative to the rims.  In fact, in the central region we see some Fe depletion and Si enrichment relative to the edges of the vein. In the "glassy" pod, however, we see only nominal enrichment of S in clear glass areas over Lith.A.  These results indicate that although sulfur is sometimes present in association with Fe, it is mostly present in association with other elements or occluded as elemental/native sulfur in Lith C. Al2O3 and CaO do not show significant variations from one edge of the vein to the other. Na shows erratic behavior; enriched at the center in ,77 and depleted in ,78. Line-averages   At different sites in the veins we measured elemental composition sequentially along a line (about 10 to 20 data points) using raster beam mode, and obtained the average composition of the vein for that area. We measured data for a few representative areas at the bottom, middle and the top of the vein before it connects to the "glassy" pod.  We also obtained average composition for a few selected areas in the pod, by taking data in the crystalfree (smooth-glassy) regions.  Each line-average chemical composition is normalized to Lith A composition of (4) and the results are plotted as a histogram in Fig.2 for EET 79001,77 (as an example).  Each vertical bar in an elementgroup in the figure represents the average-normalized elemental abundance for one line.  The vertical bar arrangement, from left to right correspond to areas from bottom to top going sequentially along the vein.  The last two bars correspond to the areas in the glass pod.  We clearly see 2 to 3 fold enrichment of SO3 and moderate enrichment of Al2O3 (up to ~50 %) and CaO (up to ~10%) uniformly in the veins relative to Lith A.  The relatively large abundance of S in the veins is not likely to be due to partial melting of Lith A because incompatible elements such as K are not strongly enriched in Lith C.  However, Fe and Mg are slightly depleted in the veins relative to Lith A (Fig.2) which is consistent with the mixing model discussed below. In general, Na correlates with Al and Ca although the Na enrichment is not as reproducible as the enrichments of Al and Ca.  Note that the Na measurements were made by raster beam analysis mode and the likelihood of Na loss due to volatilization during the measurement is low.  TiO2 and Cr2O3 Records of Molten Martian Soil in EET 79001 Meteorite:  M. N. Rao, et al. (indicative of ilmenite and chromite, respectively) are also significantly depleted in both veins and glassy regions of the pods relative to Lith A, suggesting that there is inhomogeneous distribution of oxide minerals in the source. Based on Pathfinder data (3) the expected Cl/SO3 ratio in Martian soil is ~0.1 and we expect to observe a Cl signal roughly one-tenth of the SO3 signal for the line scans of the veins.  Although the expected minimum Cl abundance signal is ~0.05% in the veins, the maximum Cl abundance signals observed in the veins correspond to ~0.02% (instrument sensitivity for Cl is ~0.01%).  Consequently, as opposed to S, Cl is not enriched in the vein. Composition of Lith C   We have shown above that the the veins are fairly uniform in grain structure and chemical composition.  Hence it is reasonable to calculate the "grand" average composition of the entire vein taking the data from different scanned areas.  Thus, we obtain the "grand" average data sets for the four thin sections ,77, 78, 18, and ,20 of EET 79001 analyzed in this study.  The data are normalized to Lith A and the results are plotted in Fig.3.  Also plotted in Fig. 3 are the data for the Martian soil from Pathfinder (3) and the maskelynite from EET 79001 (4) both normalized to Lith A.  Relative to Lith A, the veins and glass pods of Lith C are highly enriched in S and some what enriched in Al and Ca.  On a log scale in Fig.3, Ca enrichment is not so obvious. But CaO clearly shows a few percent enrichment in Fig.2. Ca enrichment is clearly observed in all the veins, even though it is fairly small in the glass pods.  We propose that this enrichment results from the mixing of Martian soil and maskelynite (plagioclase) into the pod and vein material during impact. As the Martian soil is highly enriched in S, addition of small amount of soil to Lith A prior to (or during) melting, can easily generate the large sulfur excess observed in Lith C.  However, Fig.3 shows that Martian soil is depleted in CaO relative to Lith A and any combination of this soil with Lith A cannot reproduce the CaO abundance observed in Lith C.  This CaO excess in Lith C suggests that there is an additional component, such as maskelynite, mixed with Lith A during the melting event that produced the veins and pods on Mars.  Based on these results, we estimate the amounts of Martian soil and maskelynite required to mix with Lith A to generate the Lith C assuming that the soil is the source for excess S and maskelynite is the source for excess Al.  A simple mass balance calculation yields that a mixture of ~85% Lith A, ~7% maskelynite and~8% Martian soil can reproduce the Lith C composition in EET 79001. These proportions can be used to estimate the trace element abundances in Martian soil from analyses of Lith C.  Further work on these and other inclusions in EET 79001 is in progress. References - 1) D.D.Bogard and P.Johnson, Science, 221, 651-654, (1983). 2) J.L.Gooding and D.W.Muenow Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta., 50, 1049-1059, (1986). 3) R.Rieder et al. Science, 278, 1771-1774, (1997). 4) H.Y. McSween Jr. and E.Jarosewich  Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 47, 1501-1513, (1983). 5) B.C.Clark et al. J.G.R. 87, 1005910067, (1982). 6) J.L. Gooding et al. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta. 52, 909-915, (1988). Figure 1 EET 79001,77 00.5 11.5 22.5 33.5 Na 2O K2 OS iO 2T iO 2A l2 O3 Fe OM gO Ca OP 2O 5S O3 Sa mp le /L ith A 18 4Fig.2 EET 79001,78,77,18,20 0.10 1.00 10.00 K2O Na2O Al2O3 CaO SiO2 FeO MgO TiO2 SO3 Sa mp le /L ith A `Soil Lith C Mars Maskelynite Fig.3 
