 IMPLICATIONS OF THE APPARENT ABSENCE OF MAARS IN VIKING ORBITER IMAGERY.  K. L. Mitchell and L. Wilson, Environmental Science Department, Institute of Environmental and Natural Sciences, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YQ, UK (K.L.Mitchell@lancaster.ac.uk). Introduction: Processes involving magma and ice have been significant in shaping the surface of Mars. Evidence for their interactions include outflow channels, possible pseudocraters, and collapse features, all found in Elysium Planitia, and interpreted to be indicators of near-surface volatiles1. At the same site, meltwater deposits and a degree of preservation of trough walls and floors are thought to signify greater volatile depths. Such observations are supported by thermodynamic models2. These predict a porous permafrost layer over much of Mars, permitting water to be held interstitially as ice within the regolith. Predicted extents differ, but all models seem to agree some kind of permafrost layer exists polewards of 400 latitude, and many have suggested that this extends across the entire planet. Volumes of ice held within this layer are constrained by regolith porosity, extent of the permafrost zone, and global water budget. However, the presence of ice at the polar caps is possible evidence for the continued presence of at least a partial ground-ice table, and outgassing figures would suggest greater volumes of water in the past, so it seems realistic to assume that ground-ice has been present throughout much of Martian history. Maars on Mars: Maars are broad, low-rimmed volcanic craters associated with large surface, or near-surface, steam explosions. The Espenberg Maars are caldera-like features in northwestern Alaska, and have been interpreted as being the result of the coalescence of volcanic craters formed by nearsurface hydromagmatic explosions which derived water from ground-ice3. If accepted as such, these are the largest known maars on Earth (4 to 8 km in diameter), and it seems valid to suggest that, under certain circumstances, eruptions involving the interaction of rising magmas with ground-ice can be more explosive than predicted in previous, simple models4, and also those involving groundwater under similar circumstances. Given the extent of the Martian permafrost, it would, therefore, seem likely that similar maar-forming eruptions would have been commonplace on Mars. However, to date, not one maar has been recognised on the surface of Mars. Possible explanations for the apparent absence of maars on Mars: Differences between terrestrial and Martian environments, such as lower gravity, have led to many volcanic features being lower and broader on Mars. Such differences may have resulted in the misinterpretation of maars as, for example, impact craters, collapse structures or constructional volcanic features. It is also possible that the limited resolution of Viking Orbiter imagery over much of the surface is significant. Considering the scale of the Espenberg Maars, this seems unlikely, but Mars Global Surveyor imagery should allow us to test this. Models of the Martian permafrost give a wide range of maximum depths as a function of latitude (fig. 1). However, the area over which depths are comparable to the approximately 100 m at the site of the Espenberg Maars is relatively small, existing only within a few degrees of permafrost termination. Some calculations predict no such termination. Hence, over most of the permafrost table, lithostatic pressure is likely to be considerable where interactions with magma may occur. In addition, due to the instability of ice near the surface in non-polar regions, many interactions would have taken place under a significant volume of 'dry' regolith. Fig.1: Predicted depths to the base of the Martian permafrost from 3 models 2: (a) Minimum, (b) Nominal and (c) Maximum, incl. significant pressure boundaries (assuming 50% surface porosity). Constraints on the depths at which maar-forming explosions can occur: In understanding what constrains the depths at which a maar-forming explosion can occur, it is important to consider the nature of the explosion itself. Begét et al. 3 invoked a fuel-coolant interaction (FCI) mechanism for the formation of the Espenberg Maars. Such explosions are suppressed by high pressures, which limit the initial fragmentation and heat exchange during film boiling, and prevent spontaneous nucleation vaporisation5. Theoretical considerations6 predict that the pressure limit for spontaneous nucleation in FCI's is about 13 bars (1.3 MPa), but this has proved difficult to verify7. Thermal detonation appears to be less limited by pressure, but has been shown to be unlikely at pressures much above 500 bars (50 MPa). However, in experimental systems at much lower pressures, increased pressure has been found to stabilise vapour films such that fragmentation is limited and rapid heat exchange is less likely to occur. Hydromagmatic explosions that probably included FCI's, and which are believed to have been initiated at up to about 5 km beneath Vesuvius, are likely to have been facilitated by decompression (at least below 300500 bar) and open vent conditions8,5. Relating void space to ambient pressure9, and using 20%50% for surface porosity2, it can be shown that spontaneous nucleation is limited to the upper 150-240 m of the Martian crust (fig. 1, line 1), and thermal detonation to 5500-7600 m 0.01 0.1 110 100 0102030405060708090 Latitude (+/- degs) Dep th ( km )a bc 12 3IMPLICATIONS OF THE APPARENT ABSENCE OF MAARS ON MARS:  K. L. Mitchell and L. Wilson (fig. 1, line 3). Note that for the expected pressures confining the explosions which formed the Espenberg Maars (2.2 Mpa at 100 m depth, assuming 24% void space) the equivalent depth on Mars is 225-405m (fig. 1, line 2). Assuming that the pressure at the site of a subsurface magma-ice interaction is not less than lithostatic, and that such interactions will occur at the base of the permafrost, these depths provide us with useful gauges as to where maarforming explosions can occur. Using thermodynamic models one should be able to predict the latitudes over which maars may be present, if at all. Consequently, if maars are discovered at specific latitudes on Mars, this should give some indication of the extent of ground-ice. Sustained explosive eruptions fed by ground-ice derived meltwater: Given a sustained supply of meltwater to a rising magma at depths under a non-explosive regime, it is conceivable that this will fuel a continuous volcanic eruption10, rather than a maar-forming explosion. Since the rate of conduction of heat from a point source to its surroundings varies inversely with distance from the source, for a circular conduit it is likely that the rate of meltwater generation will be reasonably constant over time, at least to first order. Surface expressions of such a continuous eruption could include phreatic or phreatomagmatic products, such as finegrained ash, and associated flood features and collapse structures (possibly resembling calderas). Development of a model for sustained magma/ground-ice interactions: Models of magma-ice interaction must take into account the differences between this case and that of magma-water interaction3, addressing (1) conductive transfer of heat into a mixture of solid ice and regolith clasts of highly variable permeability, (2) thermal and mechanical consequences of the melting phase change, (3) the ability of the resulting water to transfer heat by convection and to migrate through pore spaces towards or away from the magma conduit, and (4) the consequences of the water-steam phase change close to the conduit (which at great depths, where the ambient pressure exceeeds the control pressure, may not occur). A limiting case involves a regolith made impermeable by ice crystals saturating the pore space, so that all excess meltwater is forced into the conduit. Fig.2: A simple model for volcanic eruptions through groundice A simple 1-D model (fig. 2) is being developed along these lines, in order to test some of the ideas presented here. It incorporates conservation of energy, mass continuity and Darcy's Law, similar to that developed by Delaney11 for groundwater flow. We assume no vertical water transport (reasonable for deep interactions), an ice-saturated regolith and pressure contained by lithostatic load and rock strength. Conservation of energy involves the thermal energy of the system, the affect of advection (heat transport due to meltwater flow), conduction of heat through the regolith and mechanical work. Solution of the model should give us the pressure, density and temperature of the meltwater zone throughout time, and hence the Darcy Flow into the volcanic conduit. The boundary conditions are critical. The outer boundary is mobile, being the point where ground-ice is being melted. The inner boundary is the interface between the magma conduit and the regolith. Initially, we are assuming lithostatic pressure at the conduit wall, but we intend to refine this by integrating into existing models12 of magma conduit flow and assessing feedback, as well as attenuating effect on explosive eruptions. This work is on-going. Conclusions: It seems likely that interactions similar to those which formed the Espenberg Maars have occurred on Mars, but that the environment has resulted in features which are radically different in appearance from maars on Earth. Indeed, given a suitably massive ground-ice zone, it may be that nearly all Martian eruptions have been affected by interactions with ice, and that most explosive eruption features are, at least partially, affected by the presence of ground-ice. If so, it seems likely that eruptions were more explosive than predicted by models of magmatic explosions4, resulting in finer-grained pyroclasts. These may have contributed to fine soils on the Martian surface, which would add weight to the argument that significant parts of the fine materials at the Viking and Pathfinder landing sites can be interpreted, plausibly, as pyroclastic ash13. In addition, the volumes of many collapse structures, such as calderas, may have been contributed to by the sapping of ground-ice under constructional volcanic features, as proposed on the upper flanks of Ascraeus Mons14. If Mars Global Surveyor imagery does reveal maars, they will prove useful in determining the extent of the Martian permafrost, and consequently the volumes of ground-ice. References:  1. Mouginis Mark, P.J. (1985) Icarus, 64, 265. 2. Clifford, S.M. (1993) J. Geophys. Res., 98, 10973. 3. Begét, J.E. et al. (1996) Arctic, 49, 62. 4. Wilson, L. and Head, J.W. (1994) Rev. Geophys., 32, 3. 5. Kokelaar, B.P. (1986) Bull. Volcanol., 48, 275. 6. Henry, R.E. and Miyazaki, K. (1978) in 'Topics in two-phase heat transfer and flow', Am. Soc. Mech. Eng., New York, 1. 7. Wohletz, K.H. (1986) Bull. Volcanol., 48, 245. 8. Sheridan, M.F. et al. (1981) Nature, 22, 1387. 9. Head, J.W. and Wilson, L. (1992) J. Geophys. Res., 97, 3877. 10. Walker, G.P.L. et al. (1984) J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res., 21, 61. 11. Delaney, P.T. (1982) J. Geophys. Res., 87, 7739. 12. Wilson, L., Sparks, R.S.J., and Walker, G.P.L. (1980) Geophys. J. R. Astr. Soc., 63, 117. 13. Head, J.W. and Wilson, L. (1998) Interpretation of Mars Pathfinder and Viking soil and rock geomchemical results: A physical volcanology perspective, LPSC 29, this volume. 14. Scott, E.D. et al. (1998) Evidence for sill emplacement on the upper flanks of Ascraeus Mons volcano, Mars, LPSC 29, this volume. HEAT HEAT Melt front Magma conduit Meltwater saturated regolith Meltwater flow Ice saturated regolith Meltwater flow Melt front 
