 ACID-SULFATE HYDROTHERMAL FLUIDS AND THE ORIGIN OF THE MARTIAN SOIL.  H. E. Newsom1, J. J. Hagerty1 and F. Goff2, 1University of New Mexico, Institute of Meteoritics and Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Albuquerque, NM 87131, newsom@unm.edu. 2Earth and Environmental Sciences Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545. The chemical composition of the surface soil on Mars has important implications for the nature of surface processes on that planet, including clues to the role of hydrothermal systems on Mars.  Hydrothermal systems represent likely sites for the origin of life [1].  The Martian soil consists of weathered basaltic rock and a "salt" component enriched in volatile and mobile elements, such as S, Cl, K, and Br [2, 3].  Evidence for the role of water in the formation of the soil comes from the Pathfinder dust magnetic properties experiments, which found evidence of clay-like aggregates stained or cemented with ferric oxide, probably maghemite, implying formation involving liquid water [4]. The new "hydrothermal acid-sulfate" model presented here can quantitatively explain the chemistry and formation of the Martian soil by impact crater and volcanic hydrothermal processes that deliver mobile elements to the surface.  This model is contrasted with the volcanic aerosol "acid-fog" model of Banin et al., [5].  The mobile elements delivered to the surface by either volcanic aerosol or hydrothermal transport will accumulate at the surface due to the absence of mechanisms that can recycle them back into the crust.  The soil may also contain high levels of mobile elements such as As, Pb, and Cd, which could be hazardous to human explorers [6, 7]. Hydrothermal model: The two main types of hydrothermal systems commonly found on the Earth, and probably on Mars [1], are acid-sulfate and neutral-chloride systems [8].  The neutral-chloride type is typical of high-temperature systems (usually 200-350ºC) in areas with an abundant supply of water.  To determine the chemical characteristics of such systems on Mars, Newsom and Hagerty [6] studied mobile elements from terrestrial analogues such as, subaerial hot springs, hot spring deposits, and mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal systems.  The neutral-chloride fluids commonly have lower S/Cl ratios than are observed in the Martian soil.  However, the neutral-chloride fluids alone cannot explain the composition of the Martian soil. As the availability of water declines, neutral-chloride systems evolve into acid-sulfate systems dominated by vapor transport.  In these systems, deep neutral-chloride waters provide a source of steam which condenses in the near surface environment (<100 m depth) to form an acid-sulfate liquid from oxidation of H2S to H2SO4.  Rising steam from the boiling reservoir can easily transport sulfur compounds, but not chlorine compounds, leading to high S/Cl ratios in the fluid.  The fluids also have the iron content needed to explain the formation of the magnetic particles detected in the soil by Pathfinder [4]. The ratio of mobile elements to K in terrestrial analogue systems allow estimates to be made for mobile element concentrations in Martian hydrothermal fluids.  The absolute abundances of mobile elements in these systems depend on the conditions of alteration and the effects of mineral precipitation, however the relative abundances of the mobile elements are much less variable.  The best available data for terrestrial volcanic aerosols was also compiled to quantitatively evaluate the aerosol model.  The terrestrial ratios were then multiplied by a K abundance of 3000 ppm in the soil, to obtain a predicted concentration in the Martian soil. The concentration of 3000 ppm K is based on the Phobos orbital gamma ray results (K = 2000 - 6000 ppm) [9], and the Pathfinder APXS results (K = 1700 - 4000 ppm) [3]. Corrections were also made for minor differences in the initial abundances of elements in the mantles of the Earth and Mars. The K abundance in Martian rock is highly variable. SNC concentrations range from 200 ppm up to 4,000 ppm, and the soil-free rocks measured by Mars Pathfinder have K values of up to 6,000 ppm [3].  The average K abundance of the material that produced the "rock" component of the soil is unknown, but this does not drastically change our results, even if the hydrothermal component of K in the soil is minor. The most abundant elements in the enriched salt component of the Martian soil are sulfur and chlorine.  The data represented in Fig. 1 compares the S/Cl ratios in the acidsulfate and neutral-chloride systems to Viking and Pathfinder data for the Martian soil, magma degassing data, and SNC abundances.  An important result, apparent in Fig. 1, is that volcanic aerosols, or a combination of acid-sulfate and neutral-chloride fluids can explain the Martian S/Cl ratio. The predicted abundances of key elements in the two types of hydrothermal fluids on Mars are illustrated in Fig. 2.  The enrichments of the elements Li and Cl relative to K are key signatures of neutral-chloride hydrothermal systems. Lithium, a refractory element, is not enriched in the acidsulfate or volcanic aerosol processes.  The high S and low Cl (and Na) abundances are signatures of the acid-sulfate systems.  The contribution of the element Fe to the soil from the acid-sulfate fluids is predicted to be up to 1 wt%, a factor of 100 higher than predicted for neutral-chloride fluids. Viking also detected the mobile element bromine in the Martian soil [10].  The predicted abundances of Br have been calculated at several hundred ppm for neutral-chloride fluids [6], and limited data suggest similar or greater enrichments in acid-sulfate fluids.  The predicted abundances of S, Cl, and K from a combination of acid-sulfate and neutral-chloride hydrothermal waters (Figs 1 and 2) are consistent with the abundances measured in the Martian soil, assuming all of the K is from the hydrothermal component.  If as little as 10% of the K is hydrothermal, the predicted ranges of S and Cl concentrations are still consistent with the chemistry of the soil. The production of the rock component of the soil may also be connected to acid-sulfate hydrothermal systems, due to intense local alteration for large water/rock ratios, and limited alteration for very low water/rock ratios.  On Mars vapor transport processes with very low water/rock ratios, involving widespread distal impact melt sheets and lava HYDROTHERMAL ORIGIN OF MARTIAN SOIL:  H. E. Newsom, J. J. Hagerty, and F. Goff flows, could be quantitatively important for the alteration of surficial materials such as volcanic and impact melt glass. These alteration processes could produce amorphous (palagonite-like) materials consistent with the observed spectral reflectivity of the Martian soil. Volcanic aerosol model: Volcanic aerosols from high temperature degassing of magma [11, 12] can provide the salt component of the soil.  The rock component could form by the "acid-fog" mechanism suggested by Banin et al. [5], where deposition of volcanic aerosols (salt component) on exposed surfaces is followed by the formation of acidic brines which breaks down the rock.  Chemical data from terrestrial volcanoes, especially the S/Cl ratios in the added component, are consistent with this model (Fig. 1).  However, the formation of brines under current Martian conditions can only occur at depth, in contact with ice, and isolated from the atmosphere [13].  Thus, alteration of exposed surfaces by depressed freezing point brine films is probably unlikely, except during possible episodic warm periods. Another constraint on the Martian soil concerns the time over which the soil has accumulated.  The detection of Ni in the soil by the Pathfinder APXS experiment [3] is consistent with a substantial chondritic component of several wt% in soil [14, 6].  Such large abundances of chondritic material imply the accumulation of the Martian soil over several billion years, assuming a mean planetary soil production rate of 1 meter per billion years according to the model of Flynn and McKay [14].  Thus, the ancient nature of the soil allows for significant contributions from hydrothermal systems when water was more abundant near the surface. Conclusions: We have quantitatively shown that, the observed enrichments of mobile elements in the Martian soil (salt component), especially the high sulfur to chlorine ratio could have been contributed by volcanic aerosols, or by a mixture of deposits from acid-sulfate and neutral-chloride systems.  The basaltic rock component of the Martian soil could have formed due to extensive alteration by hydrothermal fluids of host rocks and surficial deposits, especially glass.  The rock component of the soil could also be formed by other processes, such as the acid fog mechanism [5], or by impact dust production [15].  Thus, aeolian erosion over billions of years of the extensive terrains affected by ancient hydrothermal systems, and deposition of volcanic aerosols, probably led to the formation of the Martian soil.  The relative importance of volcanic aerosols and hydrothermal fluids for producing the Martian soil is not yet established. References: [1] Farmer, J.D. in Ciba Found. Symp. 202, (Wiley), p. 273; (1996) [2] Clark, B.C., Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 57, 4575 (1993); [3] Rieder R., et al., Science 278, 1771 (1997); [4] Hviid, S.F. et al., Science 278, 1768 (1997); [5] Banin, A., et al., J. Geophys. Res. 102, 13,341 (1997); [6] Newsom, H.E. and Hagerty, J.J., J. Geophys. Res. Planets 102, 19,345 (1997); [7] Hagerty, J.J. and Newsom, H.E., this conf.; [8] K. Nicholson, Geothermal fluids (Springer-Verlag), p. 263, (1993); [9] Trombka, J.I., et al., Proc. Lunar Planet. Sci. Conf. 22, 23 (1992); [10] Banin, A., et al., in Mars, p. 594, (1992); [11] Clark B.C., and A.K. Baird, Geophys. Res. Lett. 6, 811 (1979); [12] B.C. Clark and A.K. Baird, J. Geophys. Res. 84, 8395 (1979); [13] Clark, B.C., and D.C. Van Hart, Icarus 45, 370 (1981); [14] Flynn, G.J., and D.S. McKay, J. Geophys. Res. 95, 14,497 (1990). [15] Blaney, D.L. EOS suppl. 78., F410 (1997). 110 100 1000 10000 100000 1000000 Acid-Sulfate Li SNC Li Neutral-Chloride S Acid-Sulfate Cl Mars Soil Cl Co nc en tr ati on i n p pm AcidSulfate AcidSulfate AcidSulfate NeutralChloride NeutralChloride NeutralChlorideSNC SNC SNC Mars Soil Mars Soil Lithium Sulfur Chlorine Fig. 1 Fig. 2 
