LPSC template Summary. Two landing sites in Melas Chasma, central Valles Marineris, can address key questions in Martian geology. Site A (Melas Labes) would permit sampling of Hesperian ridged plains material (caprock), and two exposures of Noachian basement rocks. Site B (Melas Chasma) allows collection of material from ridged plains caprock, Noachian basement, and layered basin beds. Analysis of these samples could address the relative Martian chronology, improve understanding of early Martian processes, and decide the origin (fluvial or volcanic) of sedimentary sequences in the troughs. Scientific Framework. The landing sites selected should maximize the scientific return of visited and sampled rock exposures. Specific objectives of the 2001 mission include characterization of near-surface mineralogy and processes, sampling of ancient crustal materials indicative of paleoclimates or biological processes, and (eventually, for the 2003 Athena lander) collection of unaltered samples for later retrieval and return to Earth [1]. Aspects of these objectives can be achieved by taking advantage of the unique attributes of the Valles Marineris landing sites. Engineering Constraints. Possible latitudinal constraints on the 2001 landing sites are 30°N to 10°S, to be narrowed further during the MARS SURVEYOR LANDING SITES IN VALLES MARINERIS: HIGHLAND ROCKS FROM THE BASEMENT USING THE MARIE-CURIE LANDER. Richard A. Schultz, Geomechanics-Rock Fracture Group, Department of Geological Sciences, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557-0138 (http://unr.edu/homepage/schultz; schultz@mines.unr.edu) and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris VI. scoping process. Site elevation must be lower in elevation than 2.5 km USGS datum [2].The original Athena rover had a design traverse radius of 10 km, far greater than the Mars Pathfinder Sojourner rover [3], which would have permitted visitation and sampling of diverse lithologies at a landing site. However, use of the spare MarieCurie rover, comparable to Sojourner in capabilities, for the 2001 APEX mission enables visitation of potentially rocky or dusty sites in Valles Marineris that may be as challenging to traverse as the Pathfinder site [4]. Candidate Landing Sites. Many possible sites fit the engineering constraints and scientific objectives. Two potential sites are discussed here that present unusual opportunities for maximizing the scientific return of the mission. ♦ Site A—Melas Labes. Located at 9°S, 72° at an elevation of ~ 0 km, this site is located on a plateau of Lower Hesperian ridged plains caprock, of probable basaltic composition, located in the heart of Valles Marineris. The caprock [5] appears to be on the hanging wall (down-thrown side) of one of the large normal faults that bound Ophir Planum to the northeast, where the caprock stands at ~9 km elevation. Some east-west trending normal faults and narrow grabens, similar to those on Ophir Planum and the Tharsis plateau [6], are developed on the exposure. Of particular interest is the landslide apron that covers much of the plateau. The apron provides an opportunity to sample materials from the Noachian wallrock from likely depths of at least 3-4 km below the caprock surface. Massifs of Noachian basement rocks on the western margin of the plateau provide an additional opportunity to sample what may be a more resistant and competent Noachian lithology. Suitably precise lander targeting may enable the rover to visit and examine three distinct rocktypes: basaltic rocks of the caprock sequence, Noachian slide materials, and Noachian massifs. Clear geologic context enhances geologic interpretation relative to a simple "grab-bag" site. Subsequent sample return of caprock (from this or other locations) would permit radiometric age determination for the Early Hesperian time horizon, a key period in Martian history that may separate early Martian conditions from drier, more contemporary ones. Studies of the mineralogy, alteration, physical properties, and perhaps absolute age of the Noachian materials may address landslide emplacement processes (degree of water involvement) and the hydrologic characteristics of the material. AB '01 LANDING SITES IN VALLES MARINERIS: Schultz, R.A. ♦ Site B—Melas Chasma. The second site is located at 10°S, 74° at 0 to -1 km elevation. The target region is again a trio of geologic units. The Melas Chasma trough floor is covered by a mantle of possible aeolian origin that mantles the underlying cratered floor [e.g., 4]. Cliffs of layered basin beds that are eroded remnants of the larger sequence of older interior layered deposits [e.g., 7] are nearby and accessible. A mesa some 5 km across resembles those downfaulted remnants of caprock identified in northern troughs such as Ophir and Candor Chasmata [8]; its weathering profile (spur and gully topography), planimetric shape, and flat-topped morphology appear to distinguish it from the adjacent, more friable, layered deposits. Given the low-resolution images currently available for this site (~100 m pixel -1 ) this mesa may represent caprock in fault contact with the stratigraphically higher (Upper Hesperian) basin beds. Rover science at Site B would center on examining materials from three materials (in context), as well as field checking a key structural interpretation for central Valles Marineris. The caprock remnant may permit later sampling and radiometric dating of this key stratigraphic horizon, while the origin of the layered deposits—volcanic or fluvial—would be ascertained. A volcanic origin would suggest that the troughs, if structural in origin in the central region [e.g., 9-13], are "wet rifts" characterized by extensive volcanism in association with the normal faulting. A fluvial origin would demonstrate significant volumes of water at or near the planetary surface to relatively recent (Amazonian) times. Either result has important ramifications for the internal dynamics of Mars. Conclusions. Either site can satisfy the main scientific objectives of the 2001 Lander/APEX Rover payload mission. Site A would examine 2-3 relevant lithologies having an unambiguous geologic context. Site B would most directly address exobiological and paleo-hydrologic issues. Either site would require detailed investigations of the region around the landing site that would, as a benefit, advance the understanding of the local geology, the regional geology, structure [13], and geophysics of Valles Marineris, and global geologic problems. References. [1] Athena payload web site, http://astrosun.tn. cornell.edu/athena. [2] USGS Map I-2030, 1989. [3] Rover Team, Science 278, 1765-1768, 1997. [4] Golombek et al., Science, 278, 1743-1748, 1997. [5] Witbeck et al., USGS Map I-2010, 1991. [6] Schultz, JGR, 96, 22,777-22,792, 1991. [7] Lucchitta et al., in Mars, Univ. of Arizona Press, 453-492, 1992. [8] Lucchitta and Bertolini, LPS XX, 590-591, 1989. [9] Lucchitta et al., JGR, 99, 3783-3798, 1994. [10] Schultz, Planet. Space Sci., 43, 1561-1566, 1995. [11] Mège and Masson, Planet. Space Sci., 44, 749-782, 1996. [12] Schultz, JGR, 102, 12,009-12,015, 1997. [13] Schultz, Planet. Space Sci., 46, 827-834, 1998. BHesperian caprock (?) eolian mantle 10 km Hesperian interior layered deposits Hesperian caprock Noachian slide rocks ANoachian massifs Noachian massifs AHesperian caprock Noachian slide rocks Hesperian interior layered deposits Beolian mantle Hesperian caprock (?) 10 km 10 km 
