 COULD MARS SOIL BE A VOLCANIC AEROSOL DEPOSIT? R. B. Hargraves, Department of Geosciences, Princeton University. The soil on Mars is of similar composition at the three localities sampled, and is widely believed to be composed primarily of airborne dust. These dust particles appear  to be small (median diameter ~2-3 microns), poorly crystalline, and remarkably uniform in terms of their magnetic properties. The latter evidence indicates that they are composite, each containing 1 to 10% maghemite. The known bulk chemistry of the soil probably applies to each individual particle within it. How could such particles have formed? Fine silicate dust on Earth is usually thought of as originating by weathering:physical, by mechanical abrasion caused by saltating particles, and/or chemical -by hydrolytic alteration of rock forming minerals and glass to clay-sized material as in soil formation [1]. Speculation as to the origin of Mars dust has tended to follow some variation along these lines. Mars, however, is dry. Furthermore, while the ubiquitous aeolian features present testify to sand-sized particle migration at some time, in the current climate regime wind speeds capable of moving sand-sized particles occur rarely, if at all [2]. Only movement of the fine dust particles has been observed, these apparently  being elevated into the atmosphere by dust-devils. Such particles cannot erode by abrasion [3], nor form proper dunes. Thus the bulk of such features must date from some earlier climate regime. Together with the minimal evidence of chemical weathering of Martian rocks as observed in Lander images, the detection by remote sensing of primary anhydrous silicate minerals suggests that chemical weathering in some areas of the surface is and has been minimal. The surface now seems to be formed of fresh basaltic rock, dark dunes presumably formed of coarse sand-sized volcanic (tephra?) particles (currently immobile), and the bright ultrafine dust/soil which variably mantles both [4]. It seems as if in the current regime, all except the very finest particulate material produced at the surface by volcanism or impact remain in the form in which it was originally deposited. The current wind regime allows only fine dust to be elevated and transported. An aeolian filter. How is this dust formed? Is it merely that fraction of the broad size-spectrum of "reduced rock" particles that can be moved? Crystalline rock reduced to such fine grain size by weathering or fragmentation is not likely to yield particles as uniform  as those observed. Could it instead be that the particles are volcanic aerosols that have accumulated and survived relatively intact over considerable geologic time? Aerosols are "conventionally defined as those particles suspended in air having diameters in the range 10-3 to 10 microns." [5]. On Earth they are best known for their sulfuric character - as fine submicron sulfate droplets formed from biogenic gases or volcanic SO2, which serve to nucleate clouds (and acid rain). But included in the coarse (1 to 10 micron) inventory of  natural aerosols   (i.e. non-anthropogenic)  are soil and volcanic dusts, and sea salt. Absent (at least today) oceans, and deep weathering profiles, volcanic dust aerosol is a plausible candidate applicable to Mars. The "best" estimate of the average flux of volcanic aerosol on Earth is 33 Tg/yr dry mass [5] but can be very high (10,000 Tg/yr) during volcanic eruptions (witness Pinatubo). "Volcanic emissions consist of solid particles (ash) and gases (mainly water vapor,(H2O), sulphur dioxide (SO2) and carbon dioxide (CO2) in very variable concentrations.... The ash particles are mainly in the coarse particle range" . MARS SOIL:  R. B. Hargraves On Earth evidence of volcanic eruptions are detected in ice-cores by enrichments in sulfate in the ice, and in some studies, ash particles have been found in the vicinity of such enrichments [6,7]. Micron sized volcanic particles have been reported in polar ices and snows [8]. In all cases, the volcanic particles are angular glassy shards, the source of which can often be related to specific volcanic eruptions. The lifetime of aerosol particles on Earth is comparatively brief as they are quickly removed by gravitational transfer to the surface or by volatilization [5]. "Such transfer is brought about by precipitation ("wet deposition") and by direct uptake at the surface ("dry deposition")". Without rainfall, how this process would take place on Mars is not clear, but gravity would precipitate the coarser particles, and dry or wet deposition of the finer sulfate aerosols might contribute to the "crust" formation which is known to take place [9]. The glassy volcanic aerosol shards on Earth are usually sourced by eruptions from andesitic volcanoes, such magmas being more siliceous- and hence viscous, and volatile rich- and hence more explosive. Plinian basaltic eruptions are rare. It has been shown, however, shown that in the Martian environment, even with basaltic volcanoes, Plinian eruption would be more likely, with plumes rising to much greater heights [10,11]. Volcanic aerosol accumulations are thus to be expected on Mars. Without liquid water to cement them such deposits would have the right mobility, uniform composition, particle size, poor crystallinity and admixture with sulfate as observed and measured. A heritage for the soil by surface weathering of any form will then be unnecessary. But would the particles be red and magnetic? Basaltic glass is usually black, so presumably oxidation of ferrous to ferric iron has occurred, to make it red. How the oxidation occurred is not clear, but perhaps has something to do with the strong UV flux to which the mobile particles would have (repeatedly) been exposed. The atmospheric water on Mars is constantly decomposed by the abundant UV radiation. Hydrogen is lost from the upper atmosphere, leaving oxygen to do its work. If nanophase ferric oxide produced by this means is responsible for the magnetic properties, then as evidenced by the magnetic property experiments on Viking and Pathfinder it must be maghemite. On Earth, some sea floor basalt glass is known to contain nanometer- sized globules of near pure magnetite [12,13]. Perhaps the aerosol glass on Mars contains (or contained, before oxidation) a component of such particles. In this context, it is important to recall the conclusion of Pollack et al [14], that the Mars dust particles contain 1.2% magnetite! Whether the original content of nanophase magnetite globules in such glass on Mars (very small in terrestrial sea floor basalts) would suffice to render the particles as magnetic as they are observed to be is unknown. References: [1] Gooding et al, (1992), Ch.19 in "Mars", Univ. Arizona Press. [2] Greeley et al, (1992),  Ch.22 in "Mars", Univ. Arizona Press. [3] Greeley et al, (1985), Ch.16 in "Models in Geomorphology", Allen and Unwin. [4] Christensen and Moore, (1992), Ch21 in "Mars", Univ. Arizona Press. [5] Jonas et al, (1994), Aerosols, in "Climate Change 1994",  Cambridge University Press. [6] Palais et al, (1991), G.R.L., 18, 7, 12411244, [7] Palais, et al ( 1992), G.R.L. 19, 8, 801-804. [8] de Angelis, et al, (1985), Nature, 317, 52-54. [9] Banin et al (1997) J.G.R. 102, E6, 13341-13356. [10] Wilson and Head, (1994), Rev. Geophys. 32, 3, 221-263. [11]  Head and Wilson, (1998), 29th LPSC, Abs. 1328. [12] Pick and Tauxe, (1994), Geophys.J.Int. 119, 116128.[13] Zhou et al (1997), E.P.S.L. 150, 353-362. [14] Pollack et al (1995), J.G.R 100, E3, 5235-5250. 
