 SEDIMENTARY GEOCHEMISTRY ON MARS: MAJOR ELEMENT EVIDENCE FROM PATHFINDER AND VIKING.  Scott M. McLennan, Department of Geosciences, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY, 11794-2100, USA (Scott.McLennan@sunysb.edu). Introduction:  There is abundant evidence that a variety of sedimentary processes have operated on the surface of Mars, including weathering processes and particle transport by water, wind and perhaps ice [1]. On Earth, such processes produce generally well understood mineralogical and geochemical variations [2,3].  Direct comparisons to Mars are hampered because, on Mars, any sedimentary material is likely to be derived exclusively from basaltic provenance [4,5]. In contrast, purely basaltic sediment is exceptionally rare on Earth and has been little studied.  Nevertheless, it should be possible to place some constraints on sedimentary processes that were active on the Martian surface through examining any systematic geochemical variations apparent in the data returned from the Pathfinder and Viking missions. Martian soils from both Pathfinder and Viking missions can be regarded as sedimentary although the degree of sedimentary 'processing' is an open question.  Pathfinder sample A-8 (Scooby Doo) has the physical appearance of rock but its chemical composition is closer to soils and has been interpreted as an indurated soil [6].  Pathfinder rocks are likely to have been affected by sedimentary processes, either directly or indirectly.  Thus, rounded nodular features on rocks A-17 (Shark) and A-18 (Half Dome) may represent pebbles within a conglomerate [7] and accordingly these (and other Pathfinder rocks) may be true sedimentary rocks.  Even if the Pathfinder rocks prove to be igneous in origin, the variable sulfur content indicates that they have been affected by sedimentary processes such as through adhesion of soil or dust onto the surfaces. Analytical Considerations:  Total analytical uncertainties in Pathfinder data are large compared to those expected from measurements made in a laboratory.  Relative uncertainties range from ±5% for SiO2 up to ±40% for Na2O [6].  Some uncertainty is related to calibration factors [8] such that sample to sample precision that is required for examining geochemical variation is probably less than these values.  This is also the case for the Viking data set [9].  Comparisons between Viking and Pathfinder may well involve substantial systematic errors, although the general similarity between the average Viking and Pathfinder soil provides some confidence. Mixing:  Early evaluation of Pathfinder geochemical data recognized linear correlations between sulfur content and several other elements. These relationships were interpreted as two component mixing between rock and soil with rock A-17 (Shark) and soil A-4 being closest to the end-member compositions [6]. When examined in greater detail, using various element-ratio (e.g., CaO or Al2O3 vs. SiO2/SO3) and ratio-ratio (e.g., Al2O3/MgO vs. SiO2/SO3) plots, it is apparent that more than two and probably at least four components are required to explain the Pathfinder data set.  The rock A-3 (Barnacle Bill) and soil A-2 most commonly fall well off mixing curves calculated between A-17 and A-4.  In some cases, Viking data appear to correspond to the mixing line whereas in other cases they do not. Mineral Fractionation During Sedimentary Transport: Igneous mineralogy of SNC meteorites [4] and suggested secondary mineralogy at the Martian surface [10,11] are diverse with respect to specific gravity and accordingly it seems likely that mineral fractionation could occur during fluvial and eolian particle transport.  On a plot of FeOT vs. SiO2/SO3 most Pathfinder soils, Viking soils and Pathfinder rock A-16 (Wedge) fall above a mixing line between rock A-17 and soil A-4, consistent with addition of an iron-rich component.  Among the possibilities are variable addition of a Martian dust component such as maghemite (e.g., up to 6% Fe2O3) or variable enrichments of other iron rich phases such as Fe-sulfates. On a plot of TiO2 vs. SiO2/SO3 Viking data and some Pathfinder soils fall below a mixing line between rock A-17 and soil A-4, consistent with variable loss of a Ti-rich phase, for example, up to about 1.5% ilmenite (titanomagnetite is also a potential candidate but losses of this mineral work against any Fe-enrichment noted above).  Depletions/enrichments in heavy minerals such as ilmenite or titanomagnetite is consistent with hydrodynamic separation into lag deposits. Constraints on Sulfur Mineralogy:  The enriched sulfur (and chlorine) content of Martian soils is well established from both Viking and Pathfinder sites. However, sulfur mineralogy remains largely an open question with a variety of sulfates having been suggested [e.g., gypsum, anhydrite, jarosite, schwertmannite, kieserite, bloedite].  Although minor amounts of any of these (or comparable) minerals may be present at the Martian surface the geochemical data provide some constraints on the dominant sulfur mineralogy. Among major element data, only Mg, Fe and Cl correlate positively with sulfur content.  Other elements have either a negative correlation (Si, Al, K), no correlation (Ca, Na) or complex relationships (Ti). Although positive correlation between elements need SEDIMENTARY GEOCHEMISTRY ON MARS:  S. M. McLennan not have mineralogical significance, negative correlation or lack of correlation does suggest that such elements are not likely to be major components of any sulfur mineralogy.  Accordingly, it is unlikely if gypsum or anhydrite are the dominant sulfur minerals. On a ternary plot of the molecular proportions of SO3 - MgO - FeOT Pathfinder rocks and soils form a linear array which extrapolates to intersect the MgO FeOT tie line between basaltic shergottites and FeO and the SO3 - MgO tie line between MgSO4 and MgO. The Viking soils plot at higher sulfur content and higher FeO/MgO ratios than Pathfinder soils.  Accordingly, it is difficult to relate the Pathfinder soils to Pathfinder rock compositions through the addition or subtraction of Fe-sulfates (e.g., jarosite, schwertmannite), but it is possible to relate some of these variations to the addition of Mg-sulfates (e.g. bloedite, kieserite). The presence of Fe-sulfates cannot be ruled out altogether, especially for Viking soils. Silicate Weathering:  Recognition of silicate weathering processes on the Martian surface would be important for a number of reasons.  For example, the breakdown of olivine and pyroxene to clay minerals results in the release of significant amounts of silica and thus could have implications for interpreting the high silica nature of some Pathfinder rocks.  Although a variety of clay minerals have been suggested to be present on the Martian surface [11] the occurrence of clay minerals remains somewhat speculative. The positive correlations among Fe, Mg, S and Cl provide perhaps the strongest geochemical evidence that primary igneous minerals have reacted to form a secondary mineralogy.  Weathering of terrestrial basalt results in a number of systematic geochemical changes in the relative proportions of Al, Fe, Mg, Ca, Na and K [12].  Compared to basaltic shergottites, Pathfinder rocks and soils are generally more aluminous relative to Fe, Mg, Ca, Na and K and Pathfinder rocks are more aluminous than soils.  However, none of the samples are so aluminous as to provide unambiguous geochemical evidence for the presence of clay minerals. Assuming that Al and Fe are residual elements during weathering on the Martian surface, some constraints can be placed on weathering history.  Even taking into account possible enrichment and/or depletion of Fe due to sedimentary transport processes, it does not seem likely that Pathfinder rocks are related to soils, or that basaltic shergottites are related to either rocks or soils by simple silicate weathering. Soil Provenance and Constraints on the Average Composition of the Martian Surface:  It is well established that the geochemistry of sedimentary rocks can be used to constrain the composition of the terrestrial upper crust exposed to weathering and erosion [2].  Although sedimentary processes may have profound chemical and mineralogical effects, well mixed 'average' sediment is remarkably similar to upper continental crust estimates for the major elements [13].  On Mars, the soils may well serve the same purpose and permit an estimate of the average Martian near surface crustal composition.  The Pathfinder and Viking soils are of broadly similar composition (within about 10%) although significant differences exist for the abundances of Ti (80% average difference), Mg (20%) and S (55%).  Given the possibility of sedimentary fractionation of heavy minerals, such as ilmenite, and the possible occurrence of MgSO4 as a secondary mineral on the Martian surface, such regional differences would not be surprising. When corrected to a common S and Cl content, the Martian soil average composition is surprisingly similar to the average of the basaltic shergottites [14]. The soils are somewhat lower in CaO (average 6.9% in soils vs. 9.9% in basaltic shergottites) and higher in Na2O (2.5% vs. 1.4%) and K2O (0.3% vs. 0.1%), however, there is some overlap for all elements except K2O (and if Viking soils have K2O<0.15% as suggested by the XRF data [15] than there is also overlap for potassium).  Accordingly, the Martian upper crust probably approximates to a basaltic composition, within the compositional range of basaltic shergottites. References:  [1] Carr, M. (1981) The Surface of Mars, Yale Univ. Press, 232pp.  [2] Taylor, S. R. and McLennan, S. M. (1985) The Continental Crust:  Its Composition and Evolution, Blackwell, 312pp. [3] McLennan, S. M. et al. (1993) Geol. Soc. America Spec. Paper 284, 21-40.  [4] McSween, Jr., H. Y. (1985) Rev. Geophys., 23, 391-416.  [5] Taylor, S. R. (1992) Solar System Evolution; A New Perspective, Cambridge Univ. Press, 307pp.  [6] Rieder, R. et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1771-1774.  [7] Rover Team (1997) Science, 278, 1765-1768.  [8] Rieder, R. et al. (1997) J. Geophys. Res., 102, 4027-4044.  [9] Clark, B. C. (1993) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 57, 45754581.  [10] Burns, R. G. (1993) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 57, 4555-4574.  [11] Bell III, J. F. (1996) Geochem. Soc. Spec. Publ. 5, 359-380. [12] Nesbitt, H. W. and Wilson, R. E. (1992) Am. J. Sci., 292, 740777. [13] McLennan, S. M. (1995) Am. Geophys. Un. Ref. Shelf 3, 8-19.  [14] Lodders, K. (1998) Meteor. Planet. Sci., 33, A183-A190.  [15] Clark, B. C. et al. (1982) J. Geophys. Res., 87, 10,059-10,067. 
