MARS PATHFINDER LANDING SITE:  SIMULATIONS OF WIND EROSION AND DEPOSITION.  R. Greeley, Department of Geology, Arizona State University, Box 871404, Tempe, AZ  85287-1404, Greeley@asu.edu. Introduction: The Mars Pathfinder landing site has been subjected to a wide variety of geological processes, including fluvial, impact, and aeolian events (1,2). In the current Martian environment, wind action appears to be the dominant process shaping the surface (3), as evidenced by the passage of thermal vortex disturbances over the lander (4) and imaging from the lander which captured dust devils (5,6). Although images display a wide variety of aeolian features, including duneforms, driftlike deposits associated with small rocks, and ripplelike surface patterns, none of these features were seen to appear, disappear, or change during the operation of MPF. It should be noted that the period of operation was summer in the northern hemisphere, and winds are predicted to be relatively gentle. A fundamental question can be posed: are the aeolian features indicative of a wind-depositional, or a wind-deflational regime? Answering this question is important for deriving the general geological history of the landing site. Figure 1. Planimetric view of wind tunnel model of the Mars Pathfinder site (with lander removed).Winds were blowing from the left to the right and the geometry corresponds to the prevailing winds at MPF responsible for the formation of most of the aeolian features. Top figure shows result of deflation run in which the model was initially mantled with particles (white areas) then subjected to net erosion. Bottom figure shows same model in which a stream of particles was introduced and allowed to drift across the model for net deposition. Dark areas in both runs represent the bare model floor. Wind 'tails' result from remnants of the mantle left in the 'wind shadow' zone in the lee of the rocks. Comparisons with images of the site suggest that the MPF site is the result of net deflation. MPF: WIND EROSION AND DEPOSITION:  R. Greeley Experiments:  A series of wind tunnel experiments was conducted in which a scale model MPF site was subjected to: a) net deposition of windblown particles and b) net deflation of a mantle of fine grains. The terrain model of the MPF site was constructed at 1/10th scale, based on IMP data.  It was placed in the wind tunnel oriented with respect to the windstream consistent with the winds inferred to be responsible for the formation of most of the aeolian features (1), blowing toward an azimuth of 217˚. Experiments were run in an open-circuit atmospheric boundary-layer wind tunnel having a 1.6 by 1.6 m cross section by 16 m length test section.  In tests simulating net deposition, 100 micron particles were introduced into the free stream from the roof of the tunnel and allowed to saltate across the model.  Free stream wind speed was set at <4 m/sec, or slightly below threshold, leading to net deposition over the model.  In the deflation experiments, the model was mantled with 100 micron particles so that the rocks were completely buried.  The wind speed was maintained at a few percent above threshold, leading to net deflation across the model. Results:  Erosion and deposition of particles around obstacles appear to be controlled by airflow following a "horseshoe vortex" pattern (7). In this pattern, vortices with horizontal cores oriented parallel with the general flow are shed from the flanks of the obstacle. The surface below the trailing vortices are subjected to higher wind shear than elsewhere and lead to erosion (or non-deposition). Wind flow impinging on the face of the obstacle is 'detached' and passes over the top of the obstacle, then reattaches downwind in the lee of the obstacle. In the model runs involving net deposition, there is a constant stream of particles across the rocks. The particle paths are governed by flow through the horseshoe vortex pattern, with those caught beneath the vortex cores being carried downwind. Prominent deposits form in front of the rocks (the zone of reverse flow resulting from attachment of flow on the rock) and "wings" extending from the flanks of the rocks.  In general, "wind tails" do not form in the leeward zone of the obstacles.  With continued deposition, nearly the entire surface is mantled with the windblown grains, with only the "wake" zone in the lee of the obstacle remaining free of deposition.  Eventually, even this zone is mantled and with time, the rocks are completely buried. In model runs involving net deflation, the mantle is eroded and the tops of the rocks become exposed. These rocks present obstacles to wind flow and the horseshoe vortex pattern is established. The zone of attachment at the front of the rocks generates the trailing vortices from the flanks, creating a scour zone wrapping around the rocks and extending downwind.  The trailing vortices expand downwind, merging to erode a broad pattern. With continued deflation, eventually an equilibrium is reached for the given wind regime in which the only remnants of the mantle are in the immediate lee of the rocks forming "wind tails." The Mars Pathfinder Site:  Comparisons of the wind tunnel results with the images surrounding the MPF site suggest that the area has experienced net deflation. The wind tails seen in association with rocks at MPF are similar to those observed in the deflationary wind tunnel runs. As such they are considered to represent the erosional remnants of deposits which are interpreted to have been much more extensive in areal extent. This interpretation is qualified with the suggestion that this part of the outwash plains at MPF has probably experienced repeated burial or partial burial by windblown sediments and subsequent exumation by deflation. Although some of this repeated burial and exhumation probably occurs as small duneforms sweep across the area, most of the burial probably takes place by the accumulation of dust settled from the atmosphere during particularly dusty episodes in Mars' history. References:  (1) Smith et al., (1967), Science, 278, 1758. (2) Ward et al., J. Geophys. Res. (1999, in press).  (3) Greeley et al., J. Geophys. Res. (1999, in press). (4) Schofield et al., (1967) Science, 278, 1752. (5) Smith, P.H., and M.T. Lemmon, (1998) EOS, 79 , F549. (6) Metzger et al., (1998) EOS, 79 , F537. (7) Greeley et al., (1974) Science, 183, 847. 
