LPSC_maria.PDF IMPACT CRATER DEPOSITS AT THE MARS PATHFINDER LANDING SITE:  UPDATED RESULTS CONSIDERING EFFECTS OF AERODYNAMIC DRAG ON EJECTA.   M. S. Stefanis1 and H. J. Moore2, 1Mount Holyoke College, 2151 Blanchard Ctr., South Hadley, MA 01075, msstefan@mhc.mtholyoke.edu, 2United States Geological Survey, deceased. Introduction: Origins of the rocks at the Mars Pathfinder (MPF) site are uncertain but numerous possibilities exist.  Plausible hypotheses include: 1) catastrophic flood deposits of materials derived from the highlands to the south, 2) ejecta from local impact craters, 3) ejecta from distant impact craters, and 4) volcanic deposits from local sources.  Here, we examine the implications of ejecta from impact craters. Viking Orbiter and Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) images show that the rim of Big Crater is only 2.2 km from the site and that the region has been intensely cratered by secondary impacts.  Morphological details of the flanks of Big Crater have been obliterated.  The model of McGetchin et al. [1] indicates that the thickness of ejecta from Big Crater could be 0.3 m thick. Thus, sizable rocks and thicknesses of ejecta from Big Crater are possible.  These rocks and ejecta would include local materials from flood deposits, near surface volcanic deposits, and impactites. A size-frequency distribution of the craters surrounding the MPF site shows that the region is intensely cratered, but less intense than the lunar steadystate.  Sources for these secondaries are not obvious. However, the nearest possible source is about 180 km away and could be thousands of km away.  The ballistic model developed by Oberbeck et al. [2] that yields ratios of 'mass ejected from secondary craters' to the 'mass of the secondary projectiles', was developed for lunar impact craters.  Because we are examining Martian impact craters this model has been altered to include the effects of aerodynamic drag on the projectiles. The Mars Pathfinder Landing Site: The Mars Global Surveyor image of the Mars Pathfinder Landing site shows the surficial features used to locate the MPF lander.  The largest impact crater at the landing site is Big Crater.  Most of the other craters appear to be secondary impact craters.  These craters are relatively small, and some appear as doublets and triplets, while some occur in ray or string-like patterns. Due to these secondaries the morphological attributes of Big Crater's continuous deposits are no longer visible.  In this study crater size-frequency data are analyzed.  The possible effects of Big Crater and smaller secondary impacts from distant primary craters on the MPF landing site are also considered. Crater Size-Frequency Distribution: Crater sizefrequency data help identify and interpret surficial features and processes.  Certain geologic processes, such as fluvial and eolian deposition and erosion, affect crater size-frequency curves in characteristic manners.  The MPF site is a prime example of this. The Mars Global Surveyor image (MOC #25603 courtesy of M. C. Malin) was used to analyze the crater data from the MPF site. The curve for the MPF site was compared to that of the lunar steady-state.  "Steady-state" implies a condition where craters are destroyed as rapidly as they are created.  The number of Martian craters at the MPF site is less than those of the lunar steady-state. Craters at the MPF site may not yet have reached a steady-state (i.e. the surface has not reached saturation). Big Crater analysis: Ejecta from Big Crater must have produced secondary craters, and deposited material in the surrounding area.  Although Big Crater is only 1.5 km in diameter and 0.28 km deep, it is the largest impact crater near the MPF site, with its rim only 2.2 km away. Thicknesses of Big Crater's ejecta deposits were modeled quantitatively using the following expression from [1].  It describes ejecta thickness as a function of crater radius and range, for the Moon: t = 0.14 R0.74 (r/R)-3.0 where, t = ejecta thickness (meters), R = primary crater radius (meters), r = distance from the crater center (meters). Gravity is not a factor in this equation, thus it can be applied to Big Crater.  The ejecta thickness distribution from the rim of Big Crater was calculated. Big Crater deposited up to 31 cm of material at the MPF site (where r = 2950 m).  This thickness is considerable and could account for some of the rocks and other deposits at the landing site.  McGetchin et al. [1] point out that these thickness calculations are average values for a symmetrical distribution of ejecta.  The model does not take into account the existence of lobes and rays of ejecta, or the influence of topography. Thus, the actual thickness could be absent, smaller, or larger than 31 cm. Secondary Craters: Secondary craters are produced by the impacts of ejecta from a primary or source crater.  These impacts then eject local material along with primary crater ejecta or projectiles.  The EJECTA DEPOSITS AT THE MPF SITE:  M. S. Stefanis and H. J. Moore area surrounding the MPF site appears to be densely covered with secondary craters.  Most of these craters appear to have been created nearly simultaneously by the impact of a group of projectiles.  However, it is not clear how many earlier impact events occurred.  These secondaries also appear to be at great distances from their primary craters, because of their subdued morphologies.  Some craters seen in the MGS image exhibit varying states of preservation, yet most are shallow and their morphologies are somewhat subdued, which could be due to a number of reasons. One reason for this degradation of the craters may be that they are filled in, most likely by eolian dust or impact generated debris.  Another reason for secondaries exhibiting subdued morphologies could be complex interactions between nearly simultaneous secondary impacts from one or more primary craters.  Distinguishing features of secondary impact craters become less obvious the farther they form from the parent crater.  Subsequently, they can become easily confused with secondaries from other craters. To estimate the possible effects of secondary cratering, Oberbecks's et al. [2] model for the impact of ballistic ejecta was used.  Oberbeck's et al. [2] calculations for µ (the ratio of mass of local material ejected from a secondary crater to the primary crater ejecta mass) evaluate the effect of impact of ejecta of large craters on distant terrain.  Although their model was for the Moon, the alteration of factors, such as gravity and radius, allow the equation to be used for Mars and yields the following expression: µ = 142.1 * [ {sin 2 θs / 2 tan (Rs /2 Rm )} + sin 2 θs ] -1  * Dr -0.401 * cos 1.134 θs where, θs = the ejection angle measured from the normal (in degrees), Rs = the range from the landing site to the primary crater being considered (km), Rm= the radius of Mars (km), Dr = the secondary crater diameter (in kilometers), and 142.1 is a constant (km/s). The effect of aerodynamic drag on the projectiles was also modeled.  Oberbecks's et al. [2] model was developed for the Moon, and therefore does not take into account the presence of an atmosphere.  Due to aerodynamic drag on Mars, the velocity of the projectiles decreases, making the µ ratios smaller than previously expected.  Thus, small amounts of material from distant craters would be expected at the site, but details of original surface features may have been destroyed by impacts. The µ ratios for secondary craters produced by five craters (Bakhuysen, Holden, Sharonov, Wx and Ut) were estimated.  The data produced by these calculations were used to estimate the effects of possible impact of ballistic ejecta from these distant craters at the MPF site.  Secondary crater diameters ranging in size from 0.02 km to 0.25 km were used.  It is not clear what the ejection or impacting angles were, thus a range of angles were used (45, 60, and 75°). Source craters for Secondary Impacts: Five craters and Big Crater were selected as possible sources for the secondary craters, using the following specific criteria: their geologic age (morphology in mosaics), their location relative to the MPF site, and their range from the site. The µ ratios exceed one, for all secondary craters, indicating that they are larger than the projectiles that produced them, and that the emplaced deposits consist mostly of local material.  These impact craters have many implications for impact-generated rocks and soil-like deposits found at the landing site, and are important when studying secondary impact features. Big Crater was also examined to explore the possible effects of small secondary craters at the MPF site. Again, ballistic calculations were done for the three ejection angles.  However, the probable sizes of secondary craters produced by Big Crater were also taken into account.  The maximum secondary crater diameter used was 75 m (5% of Big Crater's diameter).  The minimum diameter used was 10 m, but smaller secondary impacts are possible.  The µ ratios are all below one, indicating that secondary craters from Big Crater that are 10-75 m across would be smaller than the projectiles that produced them, and that the emplaced deposits would consist chiefly of Big Crater ejecta. Conclusion: Once the effects of aerodynamic drag are considered, conclusions regarding material at the MPF site can be drawn.  Analyses of ejecta from impact craters suggest impact melts and breccias are unlikely, but possible, candidates for the rocks at the MPF site.  Ejecta from Big Crater would probably be fine-grained with few or no rocks as large as those at the site.  If present, such rocks would range from discontinuous to scattered.  Importantly, much of the ejecta from Big Crater will be un-shocked flood and volcanic materials derived locally.  Impact melts and breccias from distant craters are unlikely because of the large ratios of µ which imply that the vast majority of materials would be locally derived from flood deposits. References: [1] McGetchin, T. R., et al. (1973) EPSL, 20, 226-236. [2] Oberbeck, V. R., et al. (1975) The Moon, 12, 19-54. 
