EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES OF BRINES AND EVAPORITES AS APPLIED TO MARS: INITIAL RESULTS FROM 1998-1999 RUNS  J.M. Moore1,and M.A. Bullock2  1NASA Ames Research Center, MS 245-3, Moffett Field, CA 94035; 2LASP CB 392, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309  (jmoore@mail.arc.nasa.gov)  (bullock@sunra.colorado.edu) Introduction:  We are performing laboratory experiments to determine the concentrations and rates of dissolution of ions that could occur in closed, juvenile groundwater systems on Mars.  Our approach is to incubate unaltered Mars-analog minerals in initially pure liquid water in contact with a Mars gas mixture for one year. At exponentially increasing time intervals, aliquots of the solutions at three different temperatures are extracted and analyzed using standard terrestrial laboratory geochemical techniques.  Ultimately, our experiments will produce Mars analog brines which will be freeze dried to create evaporites.  The physical and chemical properties of these evaporites will be compared with spacecraft remote sensing and in situ compositional and physical data. Evaporite deposits may represent significant sinks of mobile anions (e.g. Ca2+, Na+, Mg2+, Fe2+) and cations (e.g. CO3 2-, NO3 2-, NO2 -, SO4 2-, SO3 -, Cl -) among the materials composing the martian surface and upper crust. Carbon and nitrogen are especially interesting because of their role as atmospheric gases which can become incorporated into crustal rocks.  The nature of evaporite-precursor brines formed under martian conditions is poorly understood.  Our laboratory studies investigating the formation of brines will greatly aid in improving our understanding of both the fluids and their precipitates (evaporites).  The modeling of "warm, wet Mars" alteration and precipitate mineralogies will benefit from laboratory data of the type we discuss here. The implications of the exact composition of Martian evaporite deposits are fairly important for understanding the evolution of Mars' climate.  For example, Ca and Mg carbonates, which are thermodynamically stable on Mars today [1], are unstable in the presence of SO2 [2].  On the other hand, theoretical modeling of likely precipitates indicates that dolomite (CaMg(CO3)2) should be the primary carbonate precipitate upon evaporation of model martian groundwater in contact with martian basalt [3]. Volcanism in Mars' past was almost certainly responsible for producing atmospheric SO2, complicating the picture for carbonate formation and stability.  Similarly, volatiles derived from volcanic activity, such as HF, HCl and H2SO4 would have profound effects on the nature and stability of SO4 and Cl salts, both detected in large abundances by the Viking landers [4].  Although gypsum (CaSO4 .2H2O) is the major SO4 precipitate from theoretical modeling [3], and is a likely product from the weathering of martian basalt due to volcanic gases [5], its presence as the major martian sulfate has been deemed theoretically unlikely [4]. Approach and Experimental Technique:  To generate brines, samples of unaltered mineral mixtures, which are thought to represent the rock in the upper martian crust were ground, sorted, and mixed with doublydistilled water.  Individual pristine minerals were used to simulate martian rocks and have been chosen on the basis of SNC meteorite mineralogy [6].  The slurries were placed in an environment (pressure 1 bar, temperatures set a several values: 3°, 25°, and 35° C) which represent the conditions within the martian subsurface where brines might reside. The atmospheric gases in the sample chambers were mixed to match the present composition of the martian atmosphere -- (CO2 95.50%, N2 2.70%, Ar 1.60%, O2 0.13%).  Within a set of runs, specific samples are being collected after durations of 1, 21, 42, 84, 168 and 336 days.  The individual sample durations have been chosen on the basis that most chemical reaction rates (including those that are grain-rind diffusion limited) decay exponentially with time.  At the end of the exposure, the identity and abundances of water soluble ions in the fluid are being determined, and the rock samples are examined for the presence of precipitates and weathering products.  Anion concentrations are determined to ppb levels using a Dionics 4500I Ion Chromatograph (IC) using EPA 300 protocols.  Cations are also determined at ppb levels with an ARL 3410 Plus Inductively Coupled Plasma/Atomic Emission Spectrometer (ICP/AES), following the EPA 6010 protocol.  Controls of two types are also incubated during the experiment: (a) chambers with fluid and Marsanalog minerals with Earth gas in the headspace, and (b) chambers with fluid, no rock, but with the Mars analog gas in the headspace. Experimental Apparatus:  Great care has been taken to design and build a robust set of environmental chambers that will maintain experimental vessel integrity and provide effective flow-through of reactant (Mars-analog) gas mixtures.  Three environmental chambers, one for each temperature, have been fashioned out of plexiglas gloveboxes.  The chambers are instrumented with temperature and pressure sensors and active computer controlled feedback circuits to maintain gas pressures in the chambers as well as in the individual experiment vessels.  The gloveboxes themselves are filled with CO2 and periodically purged with it.  36 vessels reside in each glove box, and are filled and periodically purged with the Mars gas mixture.  Temperature is controlled in the gloveboxes with thermostatic recirculating cooler/heaters which circulate fluid within massive aluminum pallets.  All vessels are seated within deep depressions in the pallets.  Tools and aliquot extraction supplies are passed into and out of the gloveboxes via airlocks. Results to Date:  The experiments began on November 7, 1998 and will continue for one year.  To date, aliquots at 1 day, 21 days, and 42 days have been extracted, although at the time of writing analysis has been performed only on the 1 and 21 day samples.  The primary anions in solution are carbonate, sulfate and chloride, in the range of 1 - 10 ppm after 3 weeks.  Cation concentrations are similar, with contributions from calcium, magnesium, aluminum and sodium.  We will report on the analysis of the 42 and 84 day extractions and make comparisons with Mars Pathfinder APXS data and Mars Global Surveyor TES results. MARTIAN BRINES EXPERIMENT INITIAL RESULTS:  J. M. Moore and M. A. Bullock Figure 1.  Main experimental apparatus, side view.  The airlocks to the 2 upper gloveboxes (at 25°C and 35°C) are shown, along with Mars gas mixture plumbing. Figure 2.  Rate of anion dissolution as a function of temperature.  In all cases, dissolution rate decreases with temperature.  Sulfate and chloride are the main anions in solutions after 3 weeks of incubation. Figure 3.  Rate of cation dissolution as a function of temperature.  In all cases, dissolution rate decreases with temperature.  Calcium and magnesium are the chief cations in solution after 3 weeks of incubation. Future Experiments, Testability, and Applicability of Results:  Subsequent (2nd year) experiments will be conducted using a different gas mixture (CO2 70%, N2 12%, CO 10%, O2 5%, SO2 1%, NO2 1%, CH4 0.9%, NH3 0.1% at 1 bar) to simulate the hypothesized martian paleo-atmosphere.  3rd year runs will be performed on a vitrified Mars-analog rock mixture, to assess the effects of glasses on the formation of martian brines. For the brines studies, approximately 80 g aliquots of liquid will be used in chemical analyses of the dissolved ion load.  The solute load will be tracked over time, and is expected eventually to stabilize for most ions.  For evaporite analysis, the remaining 20 g of brine will be divided into four aliquots, and desiccated under simulated Mars atmosphere in one of four ways.  These are: Evaporation, rapid and slow, and freezing  rapid and slow.  Based on pilot-run experience, we calculate that we will have a significant fraction of a milligram of evaporites to analyze. The mineral suites will be examined by infrared spectroscopy as well as by electron microscopy and powder X-ray diffraction for identification of the mineral components. Mars Pathfinder may have provided a data set that can be applied to the results of the laboratory experiments. Coherent rocks of any probable evaporite could likely be identified with a combination of APXS data and IMP imaging.  If evaporites are present only in the fines, their identification is more problematic.  In that case, mass balance calculations and laboratory data such as that proposed here might permit identification of the evaporites. TES, aboard Mars Global Surveyor, is capable of detecting evaporite minerals such as sulfates.  Sulfates may also be detectable by the TEGA instrument aboard the MVACS Mars Polar Lander, currently en route to its target. References:  [1] Fegley, B. and A.H. Treiman, Venus and Mars:  Atmospheres, Ionospheres and Solar Wind Interactions, 7-71, 1992.  [2] Clark, B.C., and A.K. Baird, Geophys. Res. Lett. 6, 811-814, 1979.  [3] DeBraal, J.D. et al. , LPI Tech. Rep. 92-04, 1992. [4] Clark, B.C., and D.C. Van Hart, Icarus 45 , 370-378, 1981.  [5] Malin, M.C., J. Geophys. Res. 79,  3888-3894, 1974.  [6] McSween, H.Y., Rev. Geophys. 23,  391-416, 1985. 
