 SEDIMENTARY STRUCTURES AT THE MARS PATHFINDER LANDING SITE. J. W. Rice, Jr., M.T. Lemmon, P.H. Smith, R.A. Yingst, Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 857210092, USA; (jrice@lpl.arizona.edu). Introduction The successful landing of Mars Pathfinder near the confluence of Ares and Tiu Valles on July 4, 1997, has prompted new interest in understanding the nature of the geomorphology of the outflow channels around the margins of the Chryse Basin. This portion of Chryse Planitia exhibits a very rich and complex history. The regional geomorphology displays a comprehensive collection of both erosional (streamlined islands, longitudinal grooving, fluvially modified impact craters and associated ejecta blankets, terraces) and depositional landforms (smooth channel deposits, deltas, and block fields). However, investigators [1, 2, 3] still do not agree upon which mechanisms (catastrophic flood, debris flow, glacial flow) created the landscape. We will present evidence which reinforces the view that this landscape was created predominantly by catastrophic floods. Multiple Flood Episodes Evidence for multiple flow events emanating from Ares, Tiu, and Simud Valles is primarily found in the orientations of streamlined islands and the terraces carved along the flanks of the streamlined islands and hills [4]. Additional evidence is found in the erosion of crater ejecta blankets and the location of terraces within channel margins. The orientation of most of the streamlined islands is S to N in the regions to the east and southeast of the landing site; this is an indicator that flows emerged from Ares Vallis. There is also an additional district of streamlined islands denoting flows from Ares Vallis. This locale of streamlined islands trend from SE to NW and is found to the south of the landing site. Another flood episode is indicated by a region of streamlined islands trending SW to NE, this is evidence for late stage flows originating from Tiu Vallis. Flow morphology and deposits from Tiu Vallis truncate materials from Ares Vallis [4]. Hence, flood deposits from Tiu Vallis were the latest to be emplaced near the landing site. Twin Peaks Previous work [5] regarding Twin Peaks indicates that the two hills, due west of the lander, are less than 50 m in height. The distance from the lander to North Twin was stated to be 860 m and the distance to South Twin 1,000 m [6]. However, new cartographic analysis [7] suggests that the distance to North Twin is 780 m and the distance to South Twin is 910 m. We have used these new refined distances to calculate the respective heights of the Twin Peaks. These are relative not absolute heights because the lander could not "see" to the base of the Twin Peaks due to the intervening ridge and trough topography. North Twin is 32 m above the local lander horizon and the height of South Twin is 49 m. Twin Peaks are located along the crest of a ridge which is aligned in the downstream direction of Tiu Vallis (SW to NE trend). This ridge was interpreted to be a debris tail deposited in the wake of Twin Peaks [5]. Initial morphologic studies [5] stated that South Twin is taller and conical and that North Twin is shorter and has a more broad flat top. We suggest that the resultant morphology of North Twin is due to being topped by the flood waters. If so, then flow depths may have exceeded 32 m rather than the 10 20 m stated by [5]. For our calculations here, we use a depth of 32 m and the same gradients as in [5] to calculate a flow velocity of 12 m/s. The size of the largest clasts moved as bedload is computed to be 2.3 m intermediate diameter. It was also noted that North Twin is banded. These bands were interpreted to be possible terraces [5]. Our work suggests that this interpretation is correct. For the sake of clarity we define a terrace as an abandoned surface which records a former level of the water surface. The proper term for the type of terrace we propose for the Twin Peaks is a strath terrace. Strath terraces are cut into preexisting topographic highs and are veneered with a layer of floodplain alluvium. Terrace morphology is a steplike landform consisting of a flat tread and steeper riser commonly of fluvial, lacustrine, or marine origin. We have identified up to five terraces on North Twin. We have also discovered up to six terraces on South Twin; this is the first mention of terraces on South Twin. Some other observations that we have noted: indicate that there (1) appears to be a lateral continuity of the terraces from one peak to the other and (2) that perched boulders appear to be sitting on the tread of some of the terraces. Rock Garden Imbricated rocks are visible throughout the landing site but the type location for this sedimentary fabric is in the Rock Garden (rocks: Wedge, Shark, Moe, Half Dome, Frog, Pumpkin). Imbrication is a SEDIMENTARY STRUCTURES AT THE MARS PATHFINDER SITE:  J. W. Rice Jr. et al. fabric of maximum stability and is commonly used to indicate paleoflow direction, where clasts dip upstream [8]. The imbricated rocks located in the rock garden indicate flow from Ares Vallis (SE to NW imbrication). Shadow zones and pebble clusters typically form around flow obstacles on the bed. When coarse particles remain anchored to the bottom and the current is not able to remove it a shadow zone is created by its protrusion. Smaller particles are protected in the shadow zone because turbulence and velocity are reduced. The flow separation can also occur in front of the obstacle because of the wall effect creating a strong resistance to flow. A shadow zone can be created here also. Pebble clusters are a classic signature of shadow zones. Pebble clusters are observed around the above mentioned imbricated rocks plus the following rounded rocks; Barnacle Bill, Bambam, Grommit, and Stimpy. Stimpy also has a percussion mark on its upper right edge. Percussion marks are created by rock to rock collisions in high velocity flows. The imbricated and rounded rocks are prominent characteristics of flood deposits. The tabular rocks (Flat Top, Garak, Pancake) do not display pebble clusters or imbrication. This may be an indicator that these rocks are impact ejecta and thus were emplaced after the flood. Other observations indicate the lack of major deflation in the area. The degree of deflation that has occurred in this area must be relatively minor because we do not detect any well developed desert pavement surfaces in the region. Additionally, if deflation was a major process one would expect to see residual sediment caps on the tops of some rocks (i.e., Flat Top, Yogi) yet no residual sediment caps are visible. Ridge and Trough Topography The landscape of the landing site is also dominated by ridges and troughs running parallel to flow directions and is attributed to catastrophic floods [5]. The ridge and trough topography at the landing site has amplitudes up to 5 m and are commonly spaced 15 - 25 m [5]. On Earth, high velocity flows often generate corkscrew vortices that create ridges and troughs oriented parallel to the direction of flow. The wavelength of these vortices is typically 2 - 4 times the height [8]. This relationship accurately describes the ridge and trough topography at the landing site. Conclusions The Mars Pathfinder landing site is replete with landforms and textures that indicate a rich complex fluvial history on both a regional and local scale. On a regional scale the geomorphology displays a comprehensive collection of both erosional and depositional landforms created by multiple catastrophic floods. Locally we have noted the existence of terraces, perched boulders, abundant imbricated clasts, shadow zones, pebble clusters, and percussion marks. All of this evidence provides strong credence to the hypothesis that catastrophic floods formed this landscape. References [1] Baker, V.R. and D.J. Milton, 1974, Icarus, 23, 27-41. [2] Tanaka, K.L., 1997, J.G.R., 102, 4131-4149. [3] Lucchitta, B.K., 1982, J.G.R., 87, 9951-9973. [4] Parker, T.J. and J.W. Rice, Jr., 1997, J.G.R., 102, No. E11, 25,641-25,656. [5] Smith, P.H., et al., 1997, Science, 278, 17581765. [6] Golombek, M.P., et al. ,1997, Science, 278, 1743-1748. [7] Oberst, J., et al., 1998, Meeting of the ISPRS, Comm. IV, WG. 9. [8] Allen, J.R.L., 1986, Principles of Physical Sedimentology, 272p. 
