 COMPARISON OF MICROPROBE AND THERMAL EMISSION SPECTROSCOPY DERIVED MODAL MINERALOGIES OF BASALT AND ANDESITE.  M. B. Wyatt1, V. E. Hamilton2, H. Y. McSween Jr.1, P. R. Christensen2, A. Patchen1, and L. A. Taylor1, 1 Department of Geological Sciences and Planetary Geosciences Institute, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee  (mwyatt@utkux.utcc.utk.edu), 2 Department of Geology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona. Introduction:  Mars Pathfinder demonstrated how difficult it is to classify Martian rocks [1].  This was in part due to the inability of the Imager for Mars Pathfinder (IMP) to detect mineralogically diagnostic absorption bands of the rocks at the landing site. Combine this with the unanticipated "icelandite" rock composition derived from the APXS, and we are left speculating not only on the origin of these rocks, but also their classification. The Thermal Emission Spectrometer (TES) aboard Mars Global Surveyor will be of great interest to those who study the surface composition of Mars [2]. One objective of TES is to determine the global mineralogic character of the Martian surface via deconvolution of thermal emission spectra.  However, converting modal mineralogy of a volcanic rock into lithology for classification purposes is a nontrivial exercise that has long confounded attempts toward terrestrial volcanic rocks classification. Terrestrial pitfalls and promises.  Traditional optical point counting methods, and the subsequent classification of terrestrial volcanic rocks by modal mineralogy, have often been based simply on the presence of recognizable phases, especially phenocrysts, while ignoring groundmass material. These methods for determining modes have resulted in names that may not represent the bulk mineralogy of the rock.  Methods capable of producing bulk modal analyses may produce very different results from optical point counting techniques and prove useful in classifying volcanic rocks. Objective.  TES data will represent the bulk modal mineralogy of Martian volcanic rocks and thus may provide new insight into their classification.  It is imperative then to utilize high resolution techniques to accurately determine the bulk modal abundance of phases in terrestrial volcanic rocks and compare results with deconvolution results from laboratory spectral data for the same rocks. Analytical Methods:  We have examined six terrestrial volcanic rock samples from two different locations.  Three samples (Hk1, Hk3, and Hk5) are from the Hakone volcano, Japan and are textually characterized as aphanitic-porphyritic rocks containing phenocrysts of plagioclase and pyroxene. Three additional samples are from the Medicine Lake Highland volcano, Northern California.  Rock 79-39d is a basaltic andesite with plagioclase phenocrysts in a glassy to microcrystalline groundmass.  Sample 79-35i displays an intersertal texture with sparse plagioclase phenocrysts.  Rock 79-3b contains approximately 30% phenocrysts, mainly plagioclase, in an intergranular groundmass. Laboratory spectroscopy.  The spectrometer used in this study is a Mattson Cygnus 100 Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) interferometric spectrometer which has been modified to measure emitted sample radiance.  A detailed description of the emission technique and the spectrometer is provided by [3]. Deconvolution of thermal IR spectra of rocks is based on the principle that the energy emitted from a rock surface is equivalent to the emitted energy of each component mineral in proportion to its observed areal percentage.  Thus, a linear least-squares algorithm is applied to the spectra to derive the percentages of constituent minerals and their compositions [4, 5].  The algorithm, including model inputs, procedure, and error analysis, is described in detail by [4]. Feature Scan.  The modal abundances of minerals and glass phases (from microprobe rounds) using the Feature Scan microanalysis technique were obtained with an Oxford Instruments (LINK) Model eXL II energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) mounted on a Cameca SX-50 electron microprobe at the University of Tennessee (UT).  Feature Scan is an image analysis software package used for the detection, measurement, and analysis of features in an image [6].  Based upon preliminary chemical analyses of phases, "windows" of the energy dispersive spectrum are chosen to distinguish the various phases.  The criteria are determined after several preliminary analyses of each phase to establish their approximate compositions.  A detailed description of the Feature Scan technique and the UT microprobe is provided by [6]. Modal Mineralogy Results: The semiquantitative Feature Scan technique has an estimated precision of ~ 2% of the modal amount of each phase [6].  Linear deconvolution results from IR spectra that give abundances of <7% are viewed with suspicion [4, 7]. Figures 1 a, b, and c compare the results of the Feature Scan and linear deconvolution in determining the bulk modal mineralogy for each of the six volcanic rocks.  Most reported bulk modal analyses are not plotted to exactly 100%.  This is due to the omission of a small percentage of oxide minerals, unclassifiable material from the Feature Scan method due to sampling of grain boundaries within fine grained MICROPROBE AND TES DERIVED MODAL MINERALOGIES:  M. B. Wyatt et al. mesostasis, and inconsistent phases reported by the linear deconvolution algorithm. Andesite. TES-derived bulk modal analyses of the Hakone volcano andesites (Fig.1a) display a close correlation with Feature Scan data with respect to plagioclase (45-45, 50-47, and 52-60 modal % respectively) but vary substantially in their detection of orthopyroxene (1-16, 5-16, and 7-15 %).  Augite is detected in relatively small amounts by both techniques (3-8, 3-5, and 7-5 %).  The linear deconvolution models a small amount of olivine while Feature Scan detects none. Feature Scan detects consistently more silica than linear deconvolution as values range from 17-11, 13-9, and 15-11 modal %. An even greater  difference is observed in the measurement of glass with Feature Scan detecting on average 15 % modal abundance and TES lacking any. Basaltic andesite.  Figure 1b shows that the plagioclase abundance is similarly calculated by Feature Scan and the linear deconvolution (40-34 %). Neither method detects an appreciable amount of orthopyroxene, however, the difference in the amount of olivine detected by TES compared to Feature Scan (1-8 %) has increased from the andesite samples. Augite is detected in small amounts by both techniques (3-6 %) while only 2 modal % silica is detected by Feature Scan and none in the thermal IR spectra. Feature Scan classifies 45 % of the sample as glass and linear deconvolution 33 %. Basalt.  Plagioclase is calculated consistently between Feature Scan and the linear deconvolution with 72-63 and 60-75 modal % being measured (Fig.1c).  Orthopyroxene and quartz are not detected by either method.  The modal abundance of augite is well constrained for both techniques (13-10 and 8-8 %), and for olivine in sample 79-35i (15-15 %). However, 79-3b  shows a fairly large discrepancy for modal olivine (1-11 %) between the Feature Scan and linear deconvolution. Feature Scan detects an average of 6 % modal abundance for glass while none is modeled in the thermal IR spectra. Discussion: Preliminary results show good correlation in determining the modal abundance of some phases but some questionable  results involving others.  The most obvious disputable numbers come from the andesites in which the linear deconvolution modeled a significant amount of silica in the presence of olivine.  Silica and olivine are typically incompatible phases and are rarely found together in volcanic rocks.  A possible reason for the misidentification of these two phases, and also the overabundance of orthopyroxene, is the lack of a pigeonite end member in the ASU mineral library. The accuracy of deconvolution results is dependent upon many factors, one of the most significant being the set of endmember minerals used by the algorithm to model the measured rock spectra.  At the time of this writing, a pure pigeonite sample had just been obtained, and we are awaiting a more updated analysis. Another discrepancy between the two techniques involves the measured amount of silica and glass in the andesite samples.  In some deconvolution results, the modeled rock spectra display a much stronger silica peak than the actual rock spectrum. This may indicate the presence of a less crystalline silica phase (e.g., glass).  The measured composition of the glass using Feature Scan indicates a silica and potassiumrich glass phase in the andesites.  This suggests that the composition of the endmember glass used in the deconvolution is not representative of the glass in these particular andesites.  Thus, it is critically important to analyze and determine the mineralogic character of many terrestrial rocks to develop the experience needed for classifying Martian volcanic rocks. Figure 1a 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Feature Scan TES Feature Scan TES Feature Scan TES Glass Silica Olivine Augite Pigeonite Opx Plagioclase Hk 1 Hk 5 Hk 3 Figure 1a: Bulk modal mineralogy of andesite rocks determined by Feature Scan and linear deconvolution. Figure 1c 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Feature Scan TES Feature Scan TES Figure 1b 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Feature Scan TES 7935i 793b 79- 39d Figure 1b and 1c: Bulk modal mineralogy of basalticandesite and basalt rocks determined by Feature Scan and linear deconvolution of TIR spectra. References: [1] McSween H.Y. and Murchie S.L. (1999) American Scientist, 87, 36-45. [2] Christensen P.R. et al. (1992) JGR, 97, 7719-7734. [3] Ruff S.W. et al. (1997) JGR, 102, 14,899-14,913. [4] Ramsey, M. S. and Christensen, P. R. (1998) JGR, 103, 577-596. [5] Hamilton V.E. et al. (1997) JGR, 102, 25,593-25,603. [6] Taylor L.A. et al. (1996) Icarus, 124, 500-512. [7] Hamilton V. E. (1998) Ph.D Dissertation, ASU. 
