Microsoft Word - 1431.D97 SAMPLE PREPARATION AND MOUNTING STRATEGIES FOR ROBOTIC XRD/XRF ANALYSIS.  D. Vaniman1, D. Bish1, S. Chipera1, P. Sarrazin2, D. Blake2, and S. Collins3, 1Geology and Geochemistry, MS D462, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, 2NASA Ames Research Center, Mail Stop 239-4, Moffett Field, CA 94035, 3Detector Advanced Development, 300-315, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 4800 Oak Grove Dr., Pasadena, CA 91109 Introduction:  X-ray methods for analyzing heterogeneous multicomponent materials (such as rocks or soils) are considerably improved when the samples are fine-grained powders rather than solid or coarsely granular materials.  This improvement arises because finely powdered samples present a more representative, averaged view of such heterogeneous materials and allow the assumption of uniform absorption/diffraction/fluorescence properties.  In addition, the analysis of powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) data is far more straightforward when the Xray beam encounters a statistically significant number of crystallites in close to random orientation; this situation is more closely realized with finer particle sizes.  The preparation and mounting of powdered samples for X-ray analysis in the laboratory is a process that requires much time and effort; although simple in concept, the associated physical manipulations may be difficult to perform robotically. The sample collection/preparation steps leading up to X-ray analysis can be most easily analyzed if broken into component actions and considered in sequence. Sources of powdered planetary materials: Natural powders and dusts occur on most planetary surfaces, but, with the exception of some soils, sediments, and eolian materials, few natural powders are sufficiently fine. The optimum crystallite size for XRD is on the order of 1-10 µm, and sizes up to ~100 µm are often suitable (analysis of Fe-rich materials with Cu Kα radiation may require sizes ≤5 µm). Mars Pathfinder experiments point to the existence of at least some soils of <40-µm grain size [1] and eolian accumulations on spacecraft surfaces with grain sizes of <2 µm and compositions representative of Mars soil [2].  Both materials are important targets for analysis; eolian deposits carry information that can be used to infer regional compositions far beyond the range of a rover, and analyses of soils provide information on weathering processes. Fine-grained natural powders can also be obtained from planetary regoliths through sieving.  However, sieving to <<100 µm, in addition to being a difficult process, will often result in mineralogical fractionation.  On planets where hydrous weathering occurs, severe mineralogic fractionation is likely to occur by concentration of clays or other fine-grained products of hydrous alteration.  Experience with lunar regolith suggests that impact weathering of anhydrous planetary surfaces can concentrate specific components in the finest fractions (e.g., the incompatible elements of more readily crushed rock mesostases and fragments of more cleavable minerals [3]).  However, the chemical and especially the mineralogic deviations from bulk regolith are far less severe than on planets with aqueous surface processes. To analyze rocks or to obtain bulk analyses of regolith and loose sediments, a method that produces powder is required.  Rotary drilling can produce powder either through an internal-bore auger or as a byproduct of hollow-barrel coring.  The collection of powders from such systems for X-ray analysis can be a secondary operation, tied to a primary goal of collecting powder or core for other purposes (thermal analysis, spectral analysis, archival for transport to Earth).  Smaller and simpler systems could be specifically tied to the X-ray analysis instrumentation, either as a small disposable auger that embeds powder in its tines and serves as the sample mount, or as a completely different powder preparation system. Ultrasonic drilling provides a unique option that does not require a rotary drive mechanism.  Industry applications of this method typically use a slurry to remove the powder produced, but adaptations of the method can either embed powder in a reusable drill tip or deliver powder to an analysis mount. Sample Mounting Materials:  Sample mounting materials for X-ray analysis must be selected with regard to X-ray absorption and production of unwanted secondary X-rays.  Experiments conducted with the CHEMIN XRD/XRF instrument [4] illustrate the possible extent of this problem where light-element XRF data (C, N, O) are easily within the analytical capability of the CCD detector.  Unfortunately, common adhesive mounting materials contain significant amounts of C and O, giving rise to X-ray absorption and production of unwanted characteristic X-rays.  In addition, such adhesives may suffer from excessive volatility and/or poor rheological properties at temperature extremes. Experiments with non-adhesive Be mounts suggest the possibility of significant improvements in performance.  In addition to the absence of light elements that are of interest in the chemical analysis (including C), the X-ray linear absorption coefficient for Be is much less than for other practical mounting materials (Figure 1), e.g, a factor of 4-5.5 less than comparable thicknesses of Mylar at energies from 600 SAMPLE PREPARATION AND MOUNTING STRATEGIES FOR ROBOTIC XRD/XRF ANALYSIS:  D. Vaniman et al. to 10000 eV.  Comparison of transmission by a standard 20-µm Be foil and an 8-µm Mylar film shows that Be is superior to Mylar above 550 eV (encompassing the typical incident-beam energy range).  Fluorescence X-rays will not be absorbed by the substrate if samples are deposited on the detector side of the substrate; analysis of low-energy X-rays will require this configuration. Figure 1.  Transmission of X-rays by 20 µm of Be and 8 µm of Mylar.  Vertical lines indicate the C, O, and Cu Kα wavelengths. Be is also superior to other media in terms of minimal contributions to diffraction patterns; α-Be foil typically has its first significant diffraction maximum above 50° 2θ, just beyond the upper range of CHEMIN.  On the contrary, polymer films such as Mylar contribute significant amorphous scattering at crucial lower diffraction angles. Sample Mounting Methods:  A variety of sample mounting methods is used for both XRD and XRF in the conventional laboratory environment.  Several designs use direct packing of powder in configurations that appear "infinitely thick" to the detector.  A very different sample configuration is used in the CHEMIN XRD/XRF instrument, which has a transmission geometry and a detector that operates to advantage with weak X-ray sources and minimal sample amounts. Mounting without adhesive on a Be substrate is possible in a variety of ways, ranging from crimping into thin Be foils, to sweeping into the tines of a Be brush or auger inserted into a previously drilled hole, to pressing powders into the openings of a Be grid as used in current CHEMIN experiments.  The latter process provides the advantages of (1) producing a mount with many sample grains that are not in edge contact, (2) presenting many grain edges to the X-ray source for production of a greater light-element XRF signal in transmission geometry, and (3) removing almost all absorption of either primary or secondary X-rays by the sample mount. Granularity and Data Quality:  Conventional laboratory methods for XRF and XRD analysis use fine powders or fused samples (for XRF) made from fine powders.  These are labor-intensive methods that would be difficult to automate.  However, appropriately designed robotic XRD/XRF systems can be optimized to handle poorly powdered samples. This is particularly important in XRD analysis, where "spotty" diffraction patterns from poorly prepared or natural powders (i.e., poor particle statistics) present problems in most conventional diffraction configurations.  The CHEMIN CCD configuration is designed to include entire Laue diffraction rings below ~35° 2θ, thereby collecting ~100 times the data used in conventional detector systems. Analysis of each Laue ring facilitates interpretation of the natural granularity of unground samples.  For conventional analyses, circumferential integration removes much of the uncertainty introduced by spotty diffraction rings. Figure 2 shows a CHEMIN diffraction pattern for poorly powdered celestite (SrSO4).  Although visibly spotty, integration of the Laue rings on this pattern produces a plot of diffracted intensity versus 2θ that can be used easily with advanced data reduction techniques such as the Rietveld method. Figure 2.  CHEMIN diffraction pattern of poorly powdered celestite, showing the spotty diffraction rings from large particles in the sample. Acknowledgments:  Los Alamos LDRD and NASA PIDDP funding are gratefully acknowledged. References: [1] Matijevic, J.R. et al. (1997) Science 278, 1765; [2] Hviid, S.F. et al. (1997) Science 278, 1768; [3] Devine, J.M. et al. (1982) J. Geophys. Res. 87, A260; [4] Vaniman, D. et al. (1998) J. Geophys. Res. 103, 31,477. 1.00E-44 1.00E-41 1.00E-38 1.00E-35 1.00E-32 1.00E-29 1.00E-26 1.00E-23 1.00E-20 1.00E-17 1.00E-14 1.00E-11 1.00E-08 1.00E-05 1.00E-02 10 100 1000 10000 Energy (eV) Mylar, 8 um Be, 20 um Cu K-alpha C K-alpha O K-alpha Cu Kα C Kα O Kα Be, 20 µm Mylar, 8 µm 
