 THERMAL INFRARED REFLECTANCE AND EMISSION SPECTRA OF MARS-LIKE DUST COATINGS ON BASALT SUBSTRATES.  J.R. Johnson, United States Geological Survey, Flagstaff, AZ (jjohnson@flagmail.wr.usgs.gov). Introduction.  Dust coatings on rocks at the Mars Pathfinder landing site obscured the underlying rock surfaces and made it difficult to obtain pristine visible/near-infrared reflectance spectra and chemical measurements.  Such dust coatings also affect the ability of thermal infrared (TIR) spectra (such as that provided by TES and future lander and orbiter multispectral imaging systems) to reveal accurately the mineralogy of rocks.  A previous TIR study of the contaminating effects of dust coatings [1] used biconical reflectance measurements of Pahala ash (South Point, HI) on quartzite and basalt substrates to demonstrate that even thin coatings (10-20 µm) could reduce the spectral contrast of the uncoated rock substrate. Hemispherical reflectance measurements are less affected by light scattering than biconical measurements and provide more accurate reflectance spectra, which along with measurements from emission spectrometers can be compared more directly with data obtained by TES and TES-like instruments. Methods.  We are acquiring hemispherical reflectance measurements (using the Nicolet 5SXC FTIR spectrometer at the HIGP, University of Hawaii; 8 cm-1 spectral resolution) and emissivity measurements (using the Mattson Cygnus 100 FTIR, Arizona State University, 4 cm-1 spectral resolution) of basalt substrates (SP Flow, AZ) coated with variable thicknesses of Pahala ash, the JSC-1 Mars soil analog (Puu Nene, HI) and two varieties of fine-grained (≤5 µm) commercial pottery clays (Redart and OM-4 ball clay).  The coatings (sieved to ≤53 µm microns for the JSC-1 and Pahala samples) were deposited on the basalt substrates using an airfall technique within an enclosed chamber, and thicknesses were estimated using a vertically-calibrated microscope. Results.  Figures 1 and 2 are emission and reflectance spectra of Pahala ash coatings on SP basalt.  These demonstrate the reduction in spectral contrast in the 8-14 µm region that appears to be linearly related to coating thickness.  Some discrepancies are observed, such as the reversed sense of spectral contrast between the 29 µm and 32 µm coatings in Figure 1.  This may be related to the effects of particle clumping, which leads to uneven surface area coverage and larger standard deviations in the average estimated thickness. Volume scattering in the 3.5−8.0 µm region causes the spectral contrast to increase with increasing coating thickness (Figure 2).  In both spectral regions, as coating thickness increases, the spectral features of the uncoated basalt substrate are sequentially replaced with those of the coating material. This effect is quantified in Figure 3, which shows the difference in emissivity between and uncoated and coated basalt substrate at three wavelengths (18.48, 9.86, 9.16 µm (541,1014, and 1092 cm-1)) for all coating materials used.  At thicknesses greater than about 60 µm, the emissivity differences between coated and uncoated surfaces appear to level off to a constant value around 0.080.10, although more data are required to fill in the 60-85 µm thickness gap in Figure 3. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.  We thank P. Lucey (HIGP, UH), P. Christensen, and V. Hamilton (ASU) for use of laboratory spectrometers, M. Ramsey (ASU) for use of the dust deposition chamber, and C. Allen (JSC) for the JSC-1 sample. REFERENCES:  [1] Crisp and Bartholomew, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 14691, 1992. SPECTROSCOPY OF DUST COATINGS ON BASALT:  J.R. Johnson Figure 1.  Emissivity spectra (7-25 µm (400-1400 cm-1)) of SP basalt with coatings of Pahala ash. Spectral resolution is 4 cm-1. Figure 2.  Reflectance spectra (converted to emissivity; 3-14 µm (700-3400 cm-1)) of SP basalt with coatings of Pahala ash.  Spectral resolution is 8 cm-1. Figure 3.  Variation of emissivity differences between coated and uncoated basalt at 541, 1014, and 1092 cm-1 using all coating materials at a variety of coating thicknesses.  The linear trend of decreasing emissivity difference with increasing thickness (see linear fit) falls off at > 60 µm, as emphasized by the quadratic fit.  Error bars represent ±one standard deviation of estimated coating thickness. 
