 COLLISIONALLY PROCESSED ROCKS ON MARS.  F. Hörz and M. J. Cintala, SN2, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058 (Friedrich.P.Horz1@jsc.nasa.gov  or Mark.J.Cintala1@jsc.nasa.gov) Introduction:  The landforms at the Mars Pathfinder landing site, including the nature and distribution of surface boulders, are ascribed to massive flooding in the early history of Mars, ~ 2 billion years ago. [1,2]  The only subsequent surface activity seems limited to aeolian processes that have redistributed surface fines and abraded and fluted some of the surface boulders.  We fully support the view of early catastrophic floods producing the major landforms and the regional setting of the landing site within Ares Vallis.  We suggest, however, that specific surface features and overall shapes of some boulders reflect collisional processes on sub-meter scales [see also 3].  This view draws support from laboratory impacts into dense rocks, atmospheric-entry calculations (see companion abstract [4]), and observations of lunar boulders. Surface Craters:  In Figure 1, we present our first evidence for small-scale cratering in the form of a close-up image of the martian boulder "Stimpy." [1]  (Note that this rendition is substantially degraded relative to the anaglyphic stereoimages of [5] that should be consulted by the interested reader).  A circular depression occupies ~ 30% of Stimpy's top surface, whose shallow nature is typical for craters in competent rock that are governed by spallation processes.  The jagged, angular interior of this depression contrasts markedly with the rounded and subdued relief of most of the rock, and the albedo inside the depression differs from that of the remaining surfaces. All surface characteristics of the typical host rock change abruptly inside the circular depression, consistent with those expected for freshly generated surfaces.  This circular depression is almost certainly an impact crater. Figure 2 presents one of the best preserved "craters", ~ 30 cm across, observed on a lunar boulder.  Lastly, Figure 3 shows an experimental crater, ~ 8 cm across, in an fluvially rounded limestone target formed by a 3.2 mm glass projectile at 6 km/s; similar structures may be produced at <1 km/s.  Note the shallow nature of these spall-dominated craters and how readily they could be overlooked if modestly weathered and eroded.  The martian and lunar examples of Figures 1 and 2, in our view, are the best that can be found in the existing data. There is no additional, clear-cut example for any "boulder crater" at either the Pathfinder or Viking site, yet there are somewhat eroded candidates.  This seems to be consistent with the Apollo photography of lunar boulders: decimetersized craters are rarely seen.  Impact craters on competent, irregularly shaped rocks are simply hard to detect, unless they are exceptionally pristine or so small (typically < 1 cm) that they retain a central, glass-lined pit.  Such glasslined pits are absent on Mars, because the corresponding projectiles are destroyed during atmospheric entry. Collisionally Created Surfaces And Fragments: Strong evidence for impact processes on Mars can also be Figure 1.  Martian boulder "Stimpy" exhibiting an impact crater on its surface. Figure 2.  Impact crater on lunar surface boulder "Outhouse Rock" from Apollo 16. Figure 3.  Experimental crater in limestone river rock. COLLISIONALLY PROCESSED ROCKS ON MARS, F. Hörz et al. inferred from the distinct dichotomy in the small-scale surface relief of some boulders.  Within single boulders are broken, jagged, and fresh fracture-surfaces that contrast and coexist with substantially subdued, rounded, and weathered rock portions, the latter commonly dominating and defining the host.  A prime example is "Yogi," illustrated in Figure 4.  Obviously a very crisp, fresh, fracture surface dominates the top of Yogi in this view and abruptly truncates the otherwise rounded rock. Figure 5 shows an experimental analog.  Numerous named boulders also have rather jagged surface portions that contrast with the rest of the substantially rounded host (e.g., "Frog" and "Shark").  Many small rocks at the Pathfinder site could be considered collisionally produced fragments of large, rounded parents; an example ("Mouse") is illustrated in Figure 6.  In the most general sense, this dichotomy in surface properties of individual boulders reveals an abrasive regime that leads to the rounding and weathering of rocks and an energetic regime that lops off big chunks of material, thereby generating jagged and fresh-appearing surfaces.  We ascribe the rounded and weathered surfaces to a combination of fluvial transport and aeolian sand-blasting, while we suggest that the displacement of discrete chunks is due to collisional processes.  Some martian blocks appear to have massive cracks (e.g., "Chimp"), akin to those of numerous collisionally split boulders on the Moon.  Also, many small martian rocks are very angular and shard-like, lacking any evidence of erosion or weathering.  Such rocks must have substantially shorter residence times at the surface than subrounded, if not fluted, specimens.  The ubiquitous coexistence of weathered and freshly created surfaces is highly significant in our view and argues for ongoing fragmentation processes. Discussion:  We propose that collisional processes have played a larger role in the small-scale surface evolution of Mars than previously thought.  We cannot, however, specify the impact velocity, as fresh fracture surfaces simply are not diagnostic.  Some or all of the evidence could in principle be due to secondary impacts. On the other hand, meteorites with masses below about 500 g will reach the surface of the planet at substantial velocities [4].  The existence of a relatively small-scale impact environment also draws increasingly strong support from the high-resolution images taken by the MGS camera [6] which detected, at its limit of resolution, craters some 8-10 m in diameter.  We searched all Pathfinder and Viking imagery for evidence of meter-sized craters in unconsolidated soil, but to no avail.  This apparent conflict with the rock observations may be reconciled if aeolian processes result in rapid rates of removal of small craters. These observations suggest a Martian surface environment that is much more active than previously thought. References:  [1] Golombek, M.P. et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1743-1748.  [2] Smith, P.H. et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1758-1765. [3] Vasavada, A. et al. (1993) JGR, 98, E2, 3469-3476.  [4] Rochelle, W.C. et al. (1999) this volume. [5] http://mars.jpl.nasa.gov/MPF/parker/anaglyph.html. [6] http://mars.jpl.nasa.gov/mgs/msss /camera/images/index.html. Figure 4.  Jagged and relatively recent fracture surface that abruptly terminates the (missing) top of this otherwise weathered and rounded surface boulder Figure 6.  Martian surface rock "Mouse" that has a fairly rounded top which contrasts with the ragged and sharp-edged surface on which it came to rest; we view this rock as a fragment of a rounded parent. Figure 5.  Well-rounded limestone boulder impacted by a 6.4 mm soda-lime glass sphere at 1.7 km/s. 
