Hydro.PDF MIXED HYDROTHERMAL FLUIDS AND THE ORIGIN OF THE MARTIAN SOIL: A NEW QUANTITATIVE MODEL.  H. E. Newsom,1 J. J. Hagerty,1 and F. Goff2, 1University of New Mexico, Institute of Meteoritics, Dept. of Earth & Planetary Sciences, Albuquerque, NM 87131 U.S.A. E-mail: newsom@unm.edu. 2Earth and Environmental Sciences Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545 U.S.A. Introduction: The Martian soil consists of a basaltic rock component and a mobile element component. The mobile elements are often attributed to volcanic aerosols, but could also be derived from hydrothermal fluids. We show that a mixed hydrothermal fluid model constrained by the Viking and Pathfinder measurements of the Martian soil chemistry can successfully explain the composition of the mobile element component of the Martian soil. The potential hydrothermal fluid contributions to the soil are tightly constrained because the relative abundances of the mobile elements in different terrestrial analogue hydrothermal fluids are nearly constant. A combination of neutral-chloride and acid-sulfate fluids can quantitatively explain the S and Cl abundance in the soil and provide reasonable abundances of other mobile elements including Na, K, and Br, without predicting an excess of any element measured in the soil. However, the Fe abundances of the fluids are too low to explain the formation of the magnetic minerals in the soil by hydrothermal processes. Unfortunately, the relative contributions from volcanic and hydrothermal processes cannot be determined without a future trace element analysis of the soil. Hydrothermal Activity on Mars: Shallow hydrothermal systems can occur due to hot surficial deposits from impacts and volcanic flows. Deep hydrothermal systems can be heated by volcanic intrusions and by impact melt sheets and the central uplifts associated with large craters [1]. As the availability of water from nearby aquifers declines, hydrothermal systems may evolve from crater lakes, to liquiddominated neutral-chloride systems, and then to vapor-dominated acid-sulfate systems. In our approach, we are assuming that the mobile elements delivered to the surface of Mars by hydrothermal fluids or volcanic aerosols, will accumulate at the surface due to the absence of mechanisms that recycle mobile elements back into the crust. Mixed Hydrothermal Fluid Chemistry Model for the Mobile Element Component of the Soil: The two main types of hydrothermal fluid systems commonly found on the Earth [2], and probably on Mars [3], are the neutral-chloride and acid-sulfate types. The neutral-chloride type, with high chloride concentrations and low S/Cl ratios, is typical of hightemperature systems (usually 200-350ºC) in areas with an abundant supply of water. These systems form by upwelling of geothermal chloride-rich fluids above a heat source. The acid-sulfate type of hydrothermal system is found in areas where the water supply is limited. In these systems, deep neutral-chloride waters provide a source of steam which condenses in the near surface environment to form an acid-sulfate liquid from oxidation of H2S to H2SO4. Rising steam from the boiling reservoir can easily transport sulfur compounds, but not Cl compounds, leading to a high S/Cl ratio in the condensed vapor. The resulting fluid chemistry also includes high concentrations of volatile elements, such as S and ammonium ions, and low concentrations of elements such as Cl and Li. The most abundant elements in the enriched salt component of the Martian soil are S and Cl. Possible contributions to the soil are calculated with a mixing model, such that the neutral-chloride fluid provides most of the Cl, and the acid-sulfate fluid provides most of the S (Table 1). The predicted abundances of other mobile elements are based on the ratios of the mobile elements to either S, or Cl in the terrestrial analog fluids. Small corrections to the abundances of some mobile trace elements were made to account for minor differences in the initial abundances of elements in the mantles of the Earth and Mars. The predicted abundances of key elements in neutral-chloride fluids are obtained by setting the Cl content of these components equal to that in the soil, about 0.6 wt%. When adjusted to this concentration level, the neutral-chloride component can account for the Cl, the Na, and part of the K, but not the S. However, if the acid-sulfate fluids were called upon to provide most of the Cl, the abundances of S, Na, and K would be much too large. The signature of the acid-sulfate systems are high S, low Cl, and low Na abundances. The predicted abundances of mobile elements derived from acidsulfate fluids are obtained by setting the S content of this component equal to that in the soil, about 3-wt%. With this normalization the acid-sulfate fluids could account for the S and part of the Na and K, but not the Cl. However, if the neutral-chloride fluids were called upon to provide most of the S, the abundances of Cl, Na, and K would be much to large. The Martian soil contains approximately 18 wt% Fe, of which approximately 1/3 or 6 wt% is in the form of the magnetic mineral maghemite [4]. The contribution of the element iron (Fe) to the soil from MIXED HYDROTHERMAL FLUIDS:  A NEW MODEL:  H. E. Newsom et al. the acid-sulfate fluids is predicted to be less than 0.5 wt%, even though this is a factor of 100 higher than predicted for neutral-chloride fluids. Therefore, the hydrothermal fluids are unlikely to be involved in the formation of the magnetic minerals in the soil, because the Fe contents of the fluids are too low. The mobile element bromine was detected in the Martian soil by Viking [5]. The actual amount of Br present is less than the detection limit of 1,000 ppm [6]. Our model predicts an abundance of 85 ppm Br, greater than SNC abundances, but less than the detection limit. Data are scarce for trace elements from terrestrial analogue systems that might distinguish the volcanic aerosol contribution from the hydrothermal contributions. In volcanic aerosols the ratios of mobile elements to S and Cl are also more variable than in hydrothermal fluids. Lithium is enriched in the neutralchloride fluids relative to the acid-sulfate fluids and volcanic aerosols. The predicted Li abundance from the neutral-chloride fluids in this model is 0.01 wt%, well below the detection limits for this element in the Martian soil. The abundances of the toxic metals As, Cd, and Pb are predicted by the model, but have not been measured in the soil. The detection of these trace elements in the soil, will require sensitive in-situ measurements or sample return to Earth Hydrothermal Processes and the Rock Component of the Soil: The formation of the rock component of the soil by hydrothermal processes depends on the water/rock ratio. At high water/rock ratios, hydrothermal alteration can result in the formation of clays due to the extensive alteration of the host rock. Acid-sulfate systems in particular can produce intense argillic alteration, weakening the rock, making it susceptible to aeolian erosion. However, available remote sensing data does not support the presence of large concentrations of clays in the soil. With lower water/rock ratios, clay formation can be minimized, as in the formation of palagonite during glass alteration. Palagonite, a likely spectral analog for the Martian soil [7], is an amorphous or microcrystalline gel-like alteration product. During the emplacement of lava flows and melt sheets, near surface materials could be altered by water films on rock or glass surfaces produced by condensation of steam. Shallow hydrothermal systems could be supplied by shallow groundwater or ground ice. Access to groundwater beneath permafrost could occur by impact pentration or by melting due to the thermal event associated with the hydrothermal system. Conclusions: The chemical composition of the Martian soil contains clues to geological processes on the surface of Mars, and to the geochemical composition of the Martian crust. We have shown that: . The mobile element component could be derived from a mixture of acid-sulfate and neutral chloride hydrothermal fluids, which can explain the high S/Cl ratio in the soil. . Vapor-dominated acid-sulfate fluids can evolve from water-rich neutral-chloride systems when water is limited, as expected on Mars. . The iron content of the hydrothermal fluids is too low to explain the occurrence of the magnetic component of the soil. . Volcanic aerosols could contribute the mobile elements to the soil, but the relative contribution of hydrothermal fluids and volcanic aerosols requires better trace element analysis. . Hydrothermal effects with very low water/rock ratios, over wide areas of lava flows and impact melts may be important for producing both the mobile element and rock components of the soil. . Significant concentrations of toxic heavy metals may be present in the soil. References:  [1] Newsom H. E. et al. (1996) JGR, 101, 14,951-14,955. [2] Nicholson K. (1993) Geothermal fluids, 2nd ed., 263 pp., Springer-Verlag, New York. [3] Farmer J. D. (1996) Ciba Found. Symp., 202, 273-299. [4] Hviid, S. F. et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1768-1770. [5] Banin, A., et al. (1992), in Mars, edited by H. H. Kieffer et al., Univ. of Ariz. Press, Tucson, pp. 594-625. [6] Clark, B. C., et al. (1976) Science, 194, 1283-1288. [7] Singer R. B. (1982) JGR, 87, 10,159-10,168. Table 1. A mixed hydrothermal fluid model for Martian soil. The Acid-sulfate and neutral chloride soil contributions are normalized to the S and Cl abundances respectively. AcidSulfate NeutralChloride Model Mixture Martian Soil, *SNC's S 30,200 200 30,400 30,200 Cl 300 6,000 6,300 6,000 Na 2,700 6,600 9,300 17,000 K 1,300 600 1,900 3,000 Fe 580 0 580 180,000 Mn 170 0 170 3,600* Li 2 98 100 2.21* As 2 17 19 0.012* Br 30 55 85 0.25* Cd 1 0 1 0.07* Pb 1 1 2 0.5* 
