"DUST DEVILS":  GARDENING AGENTS ON THE SURFACE OF MARS,  AND HIDDEN HAZARDS TO HUMAN EXPLORATION?   J. Marshall1,  P. Smith2,  B. White3 and W. Farrell4. 1SETI Institute, MS 239-12, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035-1000, 2Lunar & Planetary Laboratory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, 3Mechanical & Aeronautical Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, 4NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, MS 695.0, Greenbelt, MD 20771. Dust devils are familiar sites in the arid regions of the world: they can produce quite spectacular displays of dust lofting when the vortices scavenge very loose dust from a dry lake bed or from recently disturbed agricultural fields. If one were to arrive at the center of an arid region, take one photograph, or even a series of photographs over a period of several days, then return the images for laboratory analysis, it would be most likely concluded that the region was inactive from an aeolian perspective. No images of general dust movement were obtained, nor were any dust devils "caught on camera"  owing to their ephemeral and unpredictable appearance, and the fact that there was deceptively little residue of their actions. If, however, a camera were to take a 360 degree continuous recording over a period of a year, and the film were then to be shown at high speed over a period a several minutes, the impression might be that of a region ravaged by air vorticity and dust movement. Extrapolate this over geological time, and it is possible to visualize dust devils as prime aeolian agents, rather than insignificant vagaries of nature. On Mars, the thin atmosphere permits the surface of the planet to be heated but it does not itself retain heat with the capacity of the earth's atmosphere. This gives rise to greater thermal instability near the surface of Mars as "warm" air pockets diapiritically inject themselves into higher atmospheric layers. Resulting boundary-layer vorticity on Mars might therefore be expected to produce dust devils in abundance, if only seasonally. The spectacular images of dust devils obtained by Pathfinder within its brief functional period on the planet testify to the probability of highly frequent surface vorticity in light of the above reasoning about observational probability. Notably, the Pathfinder devils appeared to be at least a kilometer in height. There are several consequences for the geology of Mars, and for human exploration, if dust devils are to be expected in reasonable abundance. First, from a geological perspective, the vortices will act as "gardening" agents for the top few centimeters of entrainable material. Over time (hundreds of millions, or billions of years being available), they will cover the surface with scouring paths, and the grain sizes that can be lofted by a vortex probably extends over the whole sand to dust range. The depositional paths are, of course, much larger, so that vortex-induced deposition is more widespread than vortex-induced erosion, and will without doubt, affect the whole region in which the dust devils occur (this might explain why rocks at the Viking site seemed oddly capped with dust in a region apparently subject to general aeolian scouring). On Mars, the lift forces in dust devils might be less than on earth owing to the much thinner atmosphere, but this may be counterbalanced by lower gravity and greater vortex velocities. Certainly, when active, other aeolian phenomena on Mars --sand motion and dust storms, seem no less energetic and no less capable of lofting sediments than equivalent terrestrial aeolian phenomena. Every several years, within the current climatic regime, the surface of Mars is subject to light dust fall from global dust storms. Over time, this should develop a very uniform surface layer, with commensurate uniformity in grain size, mineralogy, albedo, color, and general spectroscopic properties. Dust devils will disturb this situation by continually mixing the surface dust with underlying layers, perhaps composed of silt and sand. This size mixing will also involve compositional mixing. After some years, the thin layer of dust that may be difficult to entrain alone, becomes progressively mixed with coarser materials that could reduce the general aeolian threshold of the soil. Certainly the continual disturbance by vorticity will prevent surface stabilization that may bind or indurate grains (caused by slow cementation or ice welding at grain boundaries). If dust devils continually loft dust to kilometer heights, and the dust is sprayed into many cubic kilometers of atmosphere each time, could the devils produce a continual background of atmospheric dust that might be mistaken for the fallout of a distant largescale dust storm? From a human exploration perspective, dust devils are unlikely to pose any life-threatening situation for an astronaut unfortunate enough to encounter a momentary swirling cloud of loose soil. However, it is noted that pervasive dust is probably one of the greatest long-term hazards for a human encampment. The fineness and penetration capabilities of the dust, its electrostatic adhesive properties, and its complete ubiquity, render the material a persistent nuisance at best, but at worst, over a period of many months it is possible that space suits, machinery, habitat interiors, air filters, and so forth, could become jeopardized. Owing to dust penetration, the space suits used in the Apollo landings DUST DEVILS ON MARS:  J. Marshall et al. were rendered unusable after a few EVA activities. There will be a definite attempt to situate a human colony on Mars in an area that is far removed from the regions of the planet known for being the centers of major dust storms. At the heart of these storm systems, the dust lofting mechanics are unknown, but they are energetic and perhaps potentially lifethreatening for an astronaut. Locating a colony in a region that appears from space to be meteorologically benign may lead to colony placement in a region prone to dust devils, but dust devils are not (or have not been) detectable from orbital observations: the region surveyed for placement will appear like the apparently inactive arid area referred to earlier. The region may be spared from highly energetic weather systems, but it may not be necessarily immune from continual dust disturbance. Because dust devils occur in quiescent weather, and because they have capricious behavior, they could pose a hazard if the exploration strategy is ill prepared for their occurrence. The major effects of dust devils will be to contaminate machinery such as robotic or manned rovers, to deposit sudden pulses of soil into filtration systems that are pulling in martian atmosphere for fuel production, to deposit dust and grit on solar panel surfaces, and to generally exacerbate contamination effects already inherent in the dust. To this should be added the possibility of significant triboelectrical charging of air and dust in the vicinity of a dust devil. Again, it is unlikely to be life threatening, but it may be sufficient to create a voltage spike powerful enough to damage sensitive electronic equipment used for communications, guidance, and apparatus control functions. We note that terrestrial dust devils are electrically active, exhibiting an electric dipole moment, M, in excess of 1 C-m, corresponding to a charge density of 106 e/cc in typical 100-m high, 20-m diameter structures. This charge density is nearly a factor of 1000 times greater than the average charge density in typical thunderstorms. Since we know so little about dust devils on Mars, they may warrant further investigation in view of their potential role for aeolian geology over long periods. They could significantly affect any conclusions about surface processes on Mars drawn from spectroscopic data; these data will be a convolution of compositional signatures resulting from the "vorticity gardening" of the upper surface layer of the soil. From the perspective of developing strategies for human exploration of Mars, it might be important to allow contingencies for the phenomena of atmospheric vorticity, for vorticity with dust/sand lofting (dust devils), and for transient high-voltage electrical fields associated with the vorticity and/or soil disturbances. 
