SULFUR MIXING RELATIONSHIPS IN MARTIAN SOILS, AND POSSIBLE IMPLICATIONS FOR A GLOBALLY HOMOGENEOUS DUST LAYER.  Harry Y. McSween, Jr. and Amitabha Ghosh, Department of Geological Sciences, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996-1410 Introduction The one analyzed soil in which rock particles were noted (sample A-2) has the lowest measured sulfur content, but its MgO and Al2O3 contents appear to deviate from from the rock mixing line.  The dark surface of Mermaid dune (sample A-15) may have an armor of winnowed rock granules [4], and its sulfur content is next lowest.  Given the analtyical uncertainties, the Pathfinder soils can be approximately described as mixtures of rock and soil end members.     Mars Pathfinder APXS analyses of rocks have been interpreted as mixing lines, composed of andesitic rock plus adhering dust or soil rich in sulfur [1].  Pathfinder soil trends are not as clear, but the soils are roughly distributed along one end of the rock mixing lines and might also be mixtures. Graphical analysis of soil compositions from the Viking missions indicate that they too form linear arrays, especially when plotted against SO3.  We consider several possible explanations for the apparent sulfur mixing trends in both Viking and Pathfinder soil data, including admixture of local rock fragments at each site or addition of sulfate salts after soil deposition.     Plots of Viking XRF analyses of soils [5] show statistically significant linearities that more clearly reflect mixing of components. Dark chips were observed in blocky soils at the Viking 1 site, and similarities in the spectral radiance of these chips with those of local rocks suggested that they were lithic fragments [6].  If the chemical mixing relationships reflect admixture of soil with rock fragments, the soil compositions might be extrapolated to zero sulfur to estimate the chemistry of volcanic rocks at the Viking sites.  In this calculation, we have combined Viking 1 and Viking 2 soil analyses in the same data set, because the differences are insignificant.  The derived rock composition (normalized to 96% to account for unanalyzed elements) is as follows:  51.4% SiO2, 1.0% TiO2, 5.4% MgO, 7.7% CaO, 10.1% Al2O3, 20.4% FeO.  This basaltic rock composition is clearly distinct from the andesitic composition found at the Pathfinder site and is very similar to basaltic shergottites, which are thought to be common constituents of the Martian surface, based on spectral similarities [7].     A planet-wide dust "geologic unit," compositionally homogenized by repeated dust storms, has been hypothesized for Mars [2].  However, some spectral studies suggest mineralogical differences in bright surface materials on a regional scale [3], so it is important to distinguish between the existence of global versus regional soils.  If mixing trends from sites separated by thousands of kilometers intersect at a common composition, this component would support the hypothesis of a global dust layer. Mixing of Rock Fragments and Dust      Although the Pathfinder site consisted of fine-grained drifts atop soil-like deposits, none of the analyzed Ares Valles soils was actually fine aeolian dust; instead, all were cloddy and in places may have contained some small rock fragments [4].  Pathfinder soil compositions plot consistently at the high-sulfur end of the rock trends on plots of oxides versus SO3 and, by themselves, do not define trends with high statistical significance.  However, smearing of the soils roughly along the rock trends suggests that they might represent mixtures, possibly of soil and fragments of the local andesitic rock.     This interpretation of Viking soil compositions as mixtures of rock fragments and dust is complicated, though, by the observation that fines (interpreted as aeolian dust) have lower sulfur contents than cloddy and crusty soils [5].  If this mixing model is correct, then the fines must contain a higher proportion of the admixed lithic component than the cloddy soils in which rock fragments were actually observed.  We would expect MARS SOILS:  H. Y. McSween, Jr. and A. Ghosh that the rock fragments would be locally derived and thus be absent from the aeolian dust.  This is opposite to the observed relationship, so we consider this mixing model to be rather unlikely. endmember is apparently not the same at these sites.     Alternatively, if the soil trends are formed by sulfate cementation of dust, then the lowSO3 endmember of the Viking soils might approximate the dust composition at those sites.  Indeed, fines analyzed at the Viking 1 site were lowest in sulfur.  If this endmember (or an extension of this trend to even lower sulfur content) is similar in composition to the Pathfinder soils, this common component might represent the composition of a homogenized, global dust layer.  We note that the lowest-sulfur Viking soil (sample C-8 of [2]) is similar in most respects to the composition of the average Pathfinder soil. However, the abundances of some oxides (MgO and TiO2) are distinct.  These oxides could be forced to agree by normalizing the Viking data to a different oxide total, but then other oxides would not agree.  Although there are statistical similarities that suggest a relation between these soil compositions [9], it appears that there are some regional variations.  These differences might have arisen because sedimentary fractionations affected some elemental abundances at the different sites, or the sites might contain soils that had different origins (e.g. fluvial deposits at Ares Valles, cemented aeolian deposits at the Viking landing sites). Cementation of Dust by Sulfate     A more plausible scenario is that the Viking soil trends are due to mixing of sulfate with aeolian dust.  This might have been accomplished by cementation of deposited dust or fluvially deposited sediment with precipitated or evaporated salts.  For the purpose of illustrating the chemical effect that such cementation would have, we doubled the amount of SO3 in the average Pathfinder soil composition by adding 7.2% MgSO4 (magnesium is the only analyzed element that correlates positively with sulfur in Viking soils, and magnesium sulfates have been predicted on theoretical grounds [8]).  When the resulting soil is renormalized to the same total as the starting soil, the calculated trends for other elements versus SO3 are approximately parallel to all the observed trends in Viking soils.  Of course, these data do not rule out admixture of other salts as well, and a correlation between sulfur and chlorine suggests chloride is also present. Similarities with the Viking trends are most pronounced but, considering the analytical uncertainties, the Pathfinder soils might also have experienced limited mixing with sulfate. References: [1] Rieder R. et al. (1997) Science 278, 1771-1774; McSween H. Y. et al. (1999) J. Geophys. Res., in press.  [2] McCord T. B. et al. (1982) J. Geophys. Res. 78, 30213032; Arvidson R. et al. (1989) J. Geophys. Res. 94, 1573-1587; Banin A. et al. (1992) Chap. 18 in Mars, 594-625.  [3] Murchie S. et al. (1993) Icarus 105, 454-468.  [4] Moore H. J. et al. (1999) J. Geophys. Res., in press.  [5] Clark B. C. et al. (1982) J. Geophys. Res. 87, B12, 10059-10067.  [6] Dale-Bannister M. A. et al. (1988) LPS XIX , 239-240.  [7] Mustard J. F. et al. (1997) J. Geophys. Res. 102, 26605-26615.  [8] Clark B. C. and Van Hart D. C. (1981) Icarus 45, 370-378.  [9] Larsen K. et al. (1998) EOS 79(45), F536. Implications for the Composition of a Global Dust Layer     If a globally homogenized aeolian dust layer exists, the fine dust at both the Viking and Pathfinder sites should have the same composition.  However, no fine dust was analyzed by Pathfinder.  If Martian soils are mixtures of this dust with fragments of local rocks, the global dust composition might be determined from the intersections of the mixing trends for Viking and Pathfinder soils.  However, these intersections do not define a consistent composition.  For example, their SO3 contents range from less than 3 to 9%.  If the Viking and Pathfinder soils represent simple mixtures of rock chips and dust, the composition of the dust 
