 MARS 2001 MISSION: ADDRESSING SCIENTIFIC QUESTIONS REGARDING THE CHARACTERISTICS AND ORIGIN OF LOCAL BEDROCK AND SOIL. R. S. Saunders1, R. E. Arvidson2, C. M. Weitz1, J. Marshall3, S. W. Squyres4, P. R. Christensen5, T. Meloy6, and P. Smith7 1Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA (saunders@scn1.jpl.nasa.gov); 2 Washington University, St. Louis; 3 SETI Institute/NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA; 4Dept. of Astronomy, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY; 5Dept. of Geology, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.; 6University of W. Virginia, Morgantown, WV; 7University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ. Introduction: The Mars Surveyor Program 2001 Mission will carry instruments on the orbiter, lander and rover that will support synergistic observations and experiments to address important scientific questions regarding the local bedrock and soils. The martian surface is covered in varying degrees by fine materials less than a few mms in size. Viking and Pathfinder images of the surface indicate that soils at those sites are composed of fine particles [1, 2]. Wheel tracks from the Sojourner rover suggest that soil deposits are composed of particles <40 µm [3]. Viking images show that dunes are common in many areas on Mars [4, 5, 6] and new MOC images indicate that dunes occur nearly everywhere[7]. Dunes on Mars are thought to be composed of 250-500 µm particles based upon Viking IRTM data and Mars wind tunnel experiments [8, 9, 10]. If martian dunes are composed of sand particles >100 µm and soils are dominated by <10 µm dust particles, then this observation implies a bimodal distribution of sizes with particles in the 10100 µm size range underrepresented in the current observations. Where are the intermediate grain sizes? Have they been worn away through prolonged transport over the eons? Were they never generated to begin with? Or are they simply less easy to identify because do they not form distinctive geomorphic features such as dunes or uniform mantles that tend to assume superposition in the soil structure? Questions about martian soil: Some top level scientific issues regarding the surface materials are: 1) What are the characteristics and origin of local bedrock and soil? It will be important to identify soil components that are part of the globally homogenized sediments and those that are locally derived. Are the locally derived soils related to rocks at the scene and are they more or less weathered than local rocks? What do the local rocks and soils reveal about the climate and weathering history of the site? 2) What are the processes that indurate the soil to produce duricrust? Is the process related to films of water that evaporate and leave mineral deposits or is the agent entirely volcanic, with ash deposits cemented on deposition? 3) What is the source and nature of the apparently ubiquitous sands. Sand and dust tend to occupy completely different sedimentological niches since they are transported by different mechanisms, saltation versus suspension. Sand and dust deposits tend to be well sorted in size and of generally uniform composition. What is the size distribution of the various surface materials? What is their composition? Are there microscopic surface features that reveal sedimentary history and environments? Experiments using the 2001 Mission Payload: There are several landed and orbiting instruments on the 2001 Mission that will be used to address the scientific question of martian surface materials: The orbiter carries a gamma ray spectrometer (GRS) (Wm Boynton, UAZ, Team Leader) and a thermal emission imaging system (THEMIS) (P. Christensen, AZ State U, PI). The GRS will provide a global map of elemental abundance and hydrogen with a spatial resolution of about 300 km. The GRS data has the potential for adding information about the regional context of the landing site, but because of the low spatial resolution, local site information will not be possible. However, THEMIS will provide a multispectral IR image with 100 m resolution and the integrated imager will provide 20 m visible wavelength images. With these data we will be able to determine the mineralogical composition of the region around the landing site for minerals whose abundance is greater than 10%. This information will be used in conjunction with lander observations, discussed below, to characterize the mineralogy and composition of surface materials at the landing site. In addition, the THEMIS data will provide important clues to the grain size of the surface materials through their thermal properties. During descent, a camera on the lander, the Mars Descent Imager (MARDI) (M. Malin, Malin Space Systems, Team Leader) will provide a nested set of images from about 10 km height down to the surface with a resolution from about 10 m to a few cm near the surface. These images will be used to locate the lander and to guide rover operations. The lander and rover carry instruments to image in the IR and visible range surface materials at several resolutions, and determine the chemical and elemental composition. MECA (Mars Environmental Compatibility Assessment) (T. Meloy, WVU, PI) has four separate experiments that will study the soil. (1) A wet chemistry lab will mix a small amount of soil with water to measure the total dissolved solids, redox potential, and pH of the soil. These results can be used to determine the soil composition and identify carbonates, evaporites, and salts in the soil. (2) An optical and an atomic force microscope will be used to study individual grains and aggregates in the soil with resolutions of nanometers to millimeters. The optical microscope can be used to see the 3-D shape of grains while substrates on the microscope stage will be used to test hardness of grains for compositional identification, as well as magnetic and electrostatic properties. The atomic force microscope will determine the shape and topography of individual grains and possibly distinguish between grains of different compositions. MARTIAN SOIL:  R. S. Saunders, et al. Determining the texture and shape of soil particles will be critical for understanding their origin, such as rounded particles supporting an origin by fluvial activity or as impact glasses whereas a jagged texture suggestive of an origin by chemical weathering or explosive volcanism. The size distribution in the martian soil will also be measured by the two microscopes. (3) Three abrasion patches on the 01 lander will be similar to patches on the Pathfinder lander [11] and used to determine adhesion and magnetic properties of atmospheric dust. (4) An electrometer on the robot arm will measure triboelectric charging as the arm digs into the martian soil and will also determine electrical fields around the lander, static charges on soil, and atmospheric ion populations. By studying the soil with these four experiments, MECA will also identify potential hazards for future human explorers. The Robotic Arm Camera (RAC) (Max Planck Institute and UAZ) has three color filters that will be used to observe trenches dug into the martian soil by the robotic arm. The RAC will also take images of the soil surface and dust deposited on the MECA patches. These high-resolution images can provide insight into the stratigraphy of the soil and fine-scale textures of particles in the soil. The Athena Precursor Experiment (APEX) (S. Squyres, Cornell, PI) has several instruments that will study the soil, including a stereo color Pancam, a mini-Thermal Emission Spectrometer (Mini-TES), and a Mossbauer Spectrometer. The Pancam will be used to identify any drifts or dunes at the site and the color information can be used to classify variations in the soils. Mini-TES will be able to measure the spectral signature of the soil at 5-28 µm wavelengths. Any spectral differences detected in the soil may reflect compositional variations. Soils that are composed of Fe-bearing minerals can be analyzed by the Mossbauer spectrometer. The Marie Curie rover (the Pathfinder Sojourner engineering backup, built at JPL) will carry an Alpha Proton X-Ray Spectrometer (APXS) and cameras as part of the APEX experiment. The APXS will perform elemental analyses of the martian soil for comparison to soils at the Pathfinder and Viking sites. Rover wheel tests in the soil will also be performed to characterize the size of particles in the soil and their adhesive properties. A large number of instruments and other experiments will be brought to bear on the major scientific questions. By using the Mini-TES and Pancam to identify and characterize materials near the lander, in reach of the Robotic Arm, and then measuring the elemental composition with the APXS, and finally collecting the same surface material with the RA scoop and delivering it to the MECA instruments, we can fully characterize the materials near the lander and begin to address the important scientific topics outlined above. The orbital data from THEMIS and GRS will allow us to put the detailed surface observations into a regional geologic context. Discussion: Viking and Pathfinder results seem to support an old age for the martian soil, probably created when erosion rates were higher and fluvial activity occurred. However, it has also been proposed that the soil may still be forming under current conditions by eolian activity [12], chemical weathering [13], and explosive volcanism [14]. It is still unclear how many processes contributed to soil development on Mars or if one process dominated. It is also important to know if the processes that created sand are different from those that produced dust. If the soils formed at different times in martian history then each may have a distinct trace element signatures that can be measured [15]. In summary, results from the '01 mission will greatly improve our knowledge of the martian soil by analyzing individual grains to determine their size, shape, and composition, thereby helping to understand the processes responsible for soil development on Mars. For a discussion of how these experiment synergies will be accomplished a companion abstract in this conference [16], Mars 2001 Mission: Increasing Payload Synergies Through Coordinated Operations Planning and Implementation. References: [1] Moore, H. J. et al. (1977) JGR, 82, 4497-4523; [2] Golombeck et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1743-1748; [3] Rover Team (1997) Science, 278, 1765-1768; [4] Cutts, J. A., and R. S. U. Smith (1973) JGR, 78, 4139-4154; [5] Breed, C. S., M. J. Grolier, and J. F. McCauley (1979) JGR, 84, 8183-8204; [6] Greeley, R, N. Lancaster, S. Lee, and P. Thomas (1992) in Mars, pp. 730-766; [7] Malin et al. (1998) Science, 279, 1681-1685; [8] Haberle R.M., and B. M. Jakosky (1991) Icarus, 90,187-204; [9] Edgett, K. S., and P. R. Christensen (1991) JGR, 96, 22765-22776; [10] Greeley, R. and J. D. Iversen (1985) Wind as a Geological Process on Earth, Mars, Venus, and Titan, 333 pp.; [11] Hviid, S. F. et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1768-1770; [12] Smith, P. H. et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1758-1765; [13] Banin, A., F. X. Han, I. Kan, and A. Cicelsky (1997) JGR, 102, 13341-13356; [14] Edgett, K. S. (1997) Icarus, 130, 96-114; [15] Newsome, H. E., and J. J. Hagerty (1997) JGR, 102, 19345-19355; [16] Arvidson et al., 1999, LPSC 30. 
