 GENESIS OF THE MARS PATHFINDER SULFUR-FREE ROCK FROM A SNC PARENTAL MAGMA. M. E. Minitti and M. J. Rutherford, Department of Geological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912 (Michelle_Minitti@brown.edu). Introduction:  One of the outstanding questions raised by the Mars Pathfinder mission is the origin of the intermediate SiO2 rocks measured by the alpha proton X-ray spectrometer on the Sojourner rover. The origin of the sulfur-free rock, a hypothetical rock constructed from the measured rock data, was investigated by [1] after arguing that the sulfur-free rock is igneous based on its chemical characteristics.   [1] calculated that the sulfur-free rock could not be derived from the crystallization of a dry basaltic SNC melt, but could be derived by crystallization of a dry basaltic Galapagos Spreading Center melt.  However, studies of the SNC meteorites indicate that Martian basalts have higher FeO contents and lower Al2O3 contents than terrestrial basalts [2].  The goals of this study are to investigate the formation of the sulfur-free rock from a SNC basaltic parent focusing on the potential role of water in petrogenesis and to study the phase equilibria at the liquidus of the sulfur-free rock. Dry Vs. Wet Basalt Crystallization:  Terrestrial studies of dry and hydrous basaltic liquid lines of descent demonstrate the effect of water on a crystallizing basalt [3].  In a dry basalt, olivine, pyroxene and plagioclase crystallize early.  Crystallization of these three phases leads to enrichment of FeO and TiO2 and depletion of Al2O3 in the melt with little change in melt SiO2 content.  Late Fe-Ti oxide crystallization in the dry basalt eventually does cause melt FeO and TiO2 to decrease and melt SiO2 to increase.  The introduction of water into the melt acts to suppress the crystallization of silicate minerals, and most severely suppresses plagioclase crystallization.  By virtue of the suppression of silicate crystallization, Fe-Ti oxide becomes an early crystallizing phase.  Hydrous liquid lines of descent, therefore, are characterized by an early increase in melt SiO2 and decreases in melt TiO2 and FeO due to early Fe-Ti oxide crystallization.  Late plagioclase crystallization allows melt Al2O3 concentration to increase early in the basalt crystallization sequence.  Thus, the effect of water on basaltic liquid lines of descent may make it possible to derive the sulfur-free rock from a Martian basaltic parent melt. Experimental:  In order to determine if crystallization of a water-bearing SNC basaltic magma could lead to the sulfur-free rock, we conducted experiments on A*, a calculated trapped melt composition for a Chassigny melt inclusion [2].  A* has the characteristic high-FeO and low Al2O3 concentrations associated with Martian igneous rocks and it closely resembles other experimentally and theoretically determined SNC parent magma compositions, including the starting SNC magma composition used by [1].  Hydrous crystallization and melting experiments were conducted on either powdered or glassy A* starting material contained within AgPd tubing.  Experiments were run at Ptotal = PH2O = 200 bars in TZM pressure vessels.  Ar and CH4 were used as the pressurizing gases and were mixed in order to maintain approximately QFM within the pressure vessel.  Pressure of 200 bars was selected for the initial set of experiments in order to achieve ~ 1.5 wt% H2O in the melt, an amount of water consistent with the findings of SNC melt inclusion studies [2].  All experiments were buffered at QFM.  Experimental temperatures ranged between 1089 °C and 975 °C and run durations ranged between 24 and 100 hours. We also investigated the crystallization of dry A* melt with a series of 1 atmosphere crystallization experiments.  Powdered or glassy A* starting materials were contained in A*-saturated AuPd tubes which were then sealed in evacuated SiO2 glass tubes.  All experiments were buffered at QFM, experimental temperatures ranged between 1130 °C and 1030 °C and experiment durations ranged between 32 and 43 hours. Results:  The results of both the 200 bar and 1 atm experiments are pictured in Figure 1 relative to the A* starting composition and the sulfur-free rock composition from [4].  The 200 bar liquid line of descent (LLD) behaves in keeping with the expected effects of water on the LLD of a basalt.  Early crystallization of an intermediate-Ca pyroxene, pigeonite and Tibearing magnetite leads to increases in melt SiO2 and Al2O3 and decreases in melt FeO and TiO2.  Melt Al2O3 decreases only after plagioclase begins to crystallize in the 975 °C experiment.  The sequence of crystallization in the 200 bar experiments produces a LLD that smoothly and easily approaches the sulfurfree rock composition.  Thus, it is possible to produce the sulfur-free rock from the low-pressure crystallization of a hydrous SNC parent basalt. The 1 atm experimental data seemingly trace a LLD parallel to the 200 bar liquid line of descent.  We believe the similarity of the 1 atm and 200 bar LLD is a product of two effects.  First, low experiment "resolution" of the 1 atm LLD likely disguises the true 1 atm experimental LLD.  The two 1 atm experiments are separated by 100 °C as opposed to a separation of 20 - 30 °C for the 200 bar experiments.  The large difference between the experiments is also indicated by the phases present in the products of each experiment.  In the higher temperature (higher MgO) exSULFUR-FREE ROCK GENESIS:  M. E. Minitti and M. J. Rutherford periment, only pigeonite is present while in the lower temperature experiment (lower MgO), intermediateCa pyroxene, pigeonite, plagioclase and Ti-magnetite are present.  The path we expect the experimental 1 atm LLD to take is represented by the Galapagos Spreading Center basalt liquid line of descent [3] superimposed on the experimental data.   If a LLD were drawn from A* paralleling the Galapagos 1 atm LLD, it would miss the sulfur-free rock.  At the MgO content of the sulfur-free rock, the projected 1 atm A* LLD would be too high in FeO and TiO2 and too low in SiO2 and Al2O3. Second, low experiment resolution alone cannot explain the close approach of the 1 atm LLD to the Al2O3 content of the sulfur-free rock.  The high Al2O3 concentration of the lower temperature 1 atm experiment is at odds with the expected Al2O3 concentration determined by extrapolating the Galapagos LLD from A*.  We believe the high Al2O3 concentration of the lower temperature 1 atm experiment is due to the sluggish kinetics of plagioclase crystallization. Longer experiment durations should allow an equilibrium amount of plagioclase to crystallize, which will decrease the melt Al2O3 concentration. Sulfur-Free Rock Experiments:  While [1] provide a variety of arguments in support of an igneous origin for the sulfur-free rock, their claim is still controversial.  Another method by which to examine the igneous nature of the sulfur-free rock is to investigate the phases present at its liquidus.  If the sulfur-free rock is truly an andesite, it must be multisaturated at (or near) its liquidus temperature for the appropriate T and PH2O.  In order to determine the phases present at the liquidus of the sulfur-free rock, we conducted experiments on the sulfur-free rock composition.  A sulfur-free rock starting material was created from oxide powders.  Proportions of oxides were obtained from [5] and were normalized to 100% in order to create the oxide mix.  Experiments were conducted at P = 1 atm and 1080 °C, Ptotal = PH2O = 200 bars and 1043 °C and Ptotal = PH2O = 400 bars and 1030 °C. The products of the 1 atm experiments appear to be multisaturated but further analysis must be done. References: [1] McSween H.Y. Jr. et al. (1998) LPSC XXIX, Abstract 1054.  [2] Johnson M.C. et al. (1991) GCA, 55, 349. [3] Spulber S.D. and M.J. Rutherford (1983) Jrnl. Petrol., 24, 1. [4] Rieder R. et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1771. [5] Economou T.E. (1998) pers. comm. Figure 1:  Current 200 bar and 1 atm experimental data. Solid line represents a 1 atm liquid line of descent for a Galapagos Spreading Center basalt [3] superimposed over the experimental data.  The circle marks the A* starting composition, squares mark the 200 bar data and the triangles mark the 1 atm data.  All symbols encompass ± 1σ error in the data.  The black cross marks the sulfur-free rock composition; the extent of the crossbars encompasses the uncertainty in the sulfur-free rock measurement. a) SiO2 b) TiO2 c) FeO d) Al2O3. b) 01 23 45 0 5 10 MgO (Wt. %) TiO 2 ( Wt. % )a) 48 53 58 63 68 0 5 10 MgO (Wt. %) SiO 2 (W t. % )c) 510 15 20 25 0 5 10 MgO (Wt. %) FeO ( Wt. % )d) 710 13 16 0 5 10 MgO (Wt. %) Al 2 O3 (W t. % )
