 MAGNETIC PROPERTIES EXPERIMENTS WITH A PATHFINDER MAGNET ARRAY ON MAUNA KEA VOLCANO: EVIDENCE THE MARTIAN MAGNETIC MINERALOGY IS FE-TI SPINEL. Richard V. Morris1, Tad D. Shelfer2, Douglas W. Ming1, and D. C. Golden2. 1Code SN, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058 (richard.v.morris1@jsc.nasa.gov), 2Lockheed-Martin SMSS, Houston, TX 77058. Introduction: As described by [1,2], each of the two Magnet Arrays (MAs) on Mars Pathfinder consist of five permanent magnets that have different strengths. Each magnet is a ring and a cylindrical magnet arranged coaxially in a "bulls-eye" pattern beneath a thin surface layer. The design of the MA permits estimation of the magnetic properties (saturation magnetization and magnetic susceptibility) of adhering material, principally by the number of magnets that have adhering material and the extent to which they are saturated (i.e., can hold no more material) [1,2]. At the Pathfinder landing site, two MAs passively sampled aeolian dust. By the end of the mission, bull's-eye patterns were seen (images from the IMP - Imager for Mars Pathfinder) on the four strongest magnets of the upper MA [2]. The interpretation of [2] is that the average saturation magnetization of Martian aeolian dust is 4±2 Am2/kg and that dust particles are composite particles consisting of a strongly magnetic phase and weakly magnetic or non-magnetic phases; the proportion of the stronglymagnetic phase is expected to vary from particle to particle. The saturation magnetization is a refinement of the 1-7 Am2/kg range determined during the Viking mission using a two-magnet system [e.g., 3]. The mineralogy of the stronglymagnetic phase is not known. The preferred interpretation of both the Viking [3] and Pathfinder [2] experiment teams is maghemite (γ-Fe2O3) which is present as a stain and/or cement. However, [2] specifically note that titanomagnetites and/or titanomaghemites (i.e., Fe-Ti spinels) can not be ruled out as the strongly-magnetic phase. The mineralogy of the magnetic phase has important implications for alteration pathways on Mars.  In the view of [2], maghemite implies dissolution of ferrous iron, subsequent oxidation to ferric iron, and precipitation and incorporation of maghemite cement into silicate aggregate particles. Other formation pathways for maghemite that also involve secondary mineral formation include dehydroxylation of lepidocrocite (γ-FeOOH) and heating ferric mineralogies in the presence of organic matter [e.g., 4]. Fe-Ti spinels imply a lithogenic origin for the magnetic mineralogy, i.e. the mineralogy is not a secondary mineral. Fe-Ti spinels are the magnetic mineralogy found in palagonitic tephras that are good spectral analogues of Martian bright regions [5,6]. For our palagonitic tephra from Mauna Kea Volcano (Hawaii), the Fe-Ti spinels are not present as free particles but are present as grains within composite particles [5,6]. The occurrence of composite particles is one of the results of both the Viking and Pathfinder magnetic properties experiments, as discussed above. The saturation magnetization of our palagonitic tephras (~1-2 Am2/kg for the <1 mm size fraction [e.g., 5,6]) would seem too small to satisfy the Pathfinder magnetic properties experiment (adhering to only the two strongest magnets). However, magnetic susceptibility measurements (7-20 x10-6 m3/kg [7]) suggest that some tephras have the possibility to adhere to the four strongest magnets [2], which corresponds to the Pathfinder result. To test this possibility, we performed magnetic properties experiments with a copy of the Pathfinder Magnet Array on Mauna Kea Volcano. Methods: Experiments were done near the VLBA telescope at an elevation of ~3700 m. Ambient air temperature and wind velocity were ~280 K and ~5 m/s (gusts to ~9 m/s), and barometric pressure, relative humidity, and dewpoint were ~616 mBar, 20 to 50%, and -6 to -20°C, respectively (measured at UKIRT Weather Station). The face of the MA was positioned at an angle of ~30° with respect to the horizontal and directly into the wind. To create enough aeolian dust to do experiments in a timely manner, tephra was mechanically agitated ~1 m directly upwind from the MA. Pictures were taken at selected intervals with a digital camera to document appearance of bull's-eye patterns. Aeolian dust adhering to each magnet was collected after each experiment. A sample of bulk palagonitic tephra from the dust source region and aeolian dust that was deposited on the horizontal mounting plate of the MA were also collected. The MA is identical to the ones flown on Mars Pathfinder [1,2] except for the surface coating. It was made at the Oersted Laboratory, Niels Bohr Institute for Astronomy, Physics, and Geophysics, University of Copenhagen, Denmark, and provided courtesy of Drs. Jens Martin Knudsen and Morten Bo Madsen. Results and Discussion: Figure 1 is a sequence of images for a representative MA experiment. The magnet strength decreases from right (magnet MA1) to left (magnet MA5). Bull's-eye patterns immediately (within seconds) began to develop and, by an elapsed time of 6 min., bull'seyes are clearly visible on the three strongest magnets. Although it is difficult to see in the figure, a weak pattern is present on magnetic MA4 by 12 min. Even on the scale of 30 min., the wind speed was quite variable, and we observed removal of material. For example, there is less dust adhering to the face of the MA (away from the magnets) at time 12 min. that there is at time 6 min. The splotchy appearance at 24 min. was produced by a strong, swirly wind gust. Data for the mass of dust collected from each magnet and corresponding magnetic susceptibilities are compiled in Table 1. Magnetic susceptibilities for dust collected from the MA base plate and bulk (<1 mm) source soil are 8 x10-6 and 11 x10-6 m3/kg, respectively. The higher values of susceptibility for the dust collected by the magnets (15-19 x10-6 m3/kg) compared to the dust collected from the base plate and bulk tephra imply that a subset of particles MAGNETIC PROPERTIES EXPERIMENTS:  Morris R. V. et al. Figure 1.  Development of bulls-eyes patterns on the Magnet Array by collection of palagonitic aeolian dust. were collected from the dust. Simple mass balance implies >50% of all dust particles are sufficiently magnetic to be collected. The number is a lower limit because it assumes (1) that the dust particles not collected have magnetic susceptibility equal to zero and (2) that dust collected from the MA plate is representative of bulk dust. In any event, a large subset of dust particles was available for collection by the magnets. The steady decrease in the relative mass of dust adhering to the magnets (Table 1) is a manifestation of the decreasing relative field strength of the magnets (100 : 9 : 3 : 0.7 : 0.2; [2]). The difference in the acceleration resulting from gravity between the Earth (9.8 m/s2) and Mars (3.7 m/s2) does not significantly affect application of the Mauna Kea results to Mars, according to [8]. Summary: Except for the name given to the stronglymagnetic mineralogy, there is a very good correspondence between the observed and inferred magnetic properties of Martian aeolian dust [1,2] and the observed and actual properties of our palagonitic aeolian dust [5,6]. Martian aeolian dust and palagonitic aeolian dust at our Mauna Kea test site were both observed to adhere to the four strongest MA magnets. To do this, Martian dust particles were Table 1. Mass (actual and MA1-normalized) and magnetic susceptibility (295 K) of aeolian dust adhering to individual magnets. Mass Mag. Suscept. Magnet Act. (mg) Norm. (x10-6 m3/kg) MA1 48.7 1.00 15 MA2 19.2 0.39 17 MA3 6.4 0.13 19 MA4 4.6 0.09 18 MA5 0 0 -inferred to be composite particles of a strongly magnetic phase and weakly magnetic or non-magnetic phases. Palagonite particles are composite particles of a strongly magnetic phase (titanomagnetite) and weakly magnetic or non-magnetic phases (e.g., glass, nanophase ferric oxide, plagioclase feldspar, olivine) as determined by optical petrography and microbeam techniques. Pathfinder results indicate that a major fraction of Martian aeolian dust particles are somewhat magnetic (i.e., capable of being drawn to the magnets) rather than just a small subset. Our MA experiments show that >50% of our palagonitic dust particles are capable of being drawn to the magnets.  It is clear that the aeolian palagonitic dust used in our MA experiments can satisfy the constraints imposed by the Pathfinder MA experiments. The preferred interpretation of [1,2] is that the stronglymagnetic mineral in Martian aeolian dust is maghemite formed in an aqueous oxidation-precipitation process. We cannot rule out this interpretation.  However, based on the parallel behavior of Martian and palagonitic aeolian dust in MA experiments, we suggest that an equally viable working hypothesis is that the strongly magnetic mineral is lithogenic Fe-Ti spinels (titanomagnetites) and/or their oxidation products (titanomaghemites), as suggested previously [5,9]. Thus, certain palagonitic tephras that are spectral analogues of Martian bright regions are also magnetic analogues, including possible the same magnetic minerals. Any process on Mars (e.g., volcanism and impact events) that produces basaltic glass with included Fe-Ti spinels and possibly other mineralogies is a potential source of material that can subsequently alter to magnetic, palagonite-like soil and dust. References: [1] Hviid et al., Science, 278, 1768, 1997; [2] Madsen et al., JGR, in press, 1999; [3] Hargraves et al., JGR, 84, 8379, 1979; [4] Cornell and Schwertmann, The Iron Oxides, 1996; [5] Morris et al., JGR, 95, 14427, 1990; [6] Morris et al., GCA, 57, 4597, 1993; [7] Morris et al., JGR, to be submitted, 1999; [8] J.M. Knudsen and M.B. Madsen, personal communication, 1999; [9] Coey et al., JGR, 95, 14423, 1990. 
