 THE INTERIOR LOWLAND PLAINS UNIT OF MARS: EVIDENCE FOR A POSSIBLE MUD OCEAN AND INDUCED TECTONIC DEFORMATION.  K. L. Tanaka 1 and W. B. Banerdt 2, 1 U.S. Geological Survey, 2255 N. Gemini Dr., Flagstaff, AZ 86001, ktanaaka@flagmail.wr.usgs.gov, 2 Jet Propulsion Laboratory, M.S. 183501, Pasadena, CA 91109, bruce.banerdt@jpl.nasa.gov. Introduction: MOLA and other data of the major lowland interior plains contact mapped by Parker et al. [1-2] provide strong (but not conclusive) evidence for the infilling of the northern plains by a fluid [3], which deposited what we have mapped as the interior lowland plains unit (unit pi). However, some workers feel that paleoshorelines are not evident in Viking and MOC images along the unit margin [4-5]. Because of this disagreement, we examine the assumptions about the nature of the proposed "ocean.". We find that the apparent inconsistencies can be reconciled by the assumption of an infilling of the northern plains during the Late Hesperian to Early Amazonian by a sediment-rich, mud ocean.  Moreover, evidence for significant subsidence within the north polar basin and reversed channel-floor gradients are consistent with tectonic deformation due to the sediment load.  What Do Geologic Mapping and MOC and Viking Images Show?  Ongoing remapping of the geology of the northern plains [6] supports identification of an interior plains unit (Parker et al.'s lowland unit B [1] bounded by their Contact 2) that may cover much of the plains in the Utopia and north polar basins.  The unit contact cannot be mapped continuously with available images, so the interpretation that the contact segments outline a coherent deposit must be regarded as provisional.  Also, the new mapping differs in a few areas from Parker et al.'s mapping. According to Malin and Edgett [4], MOC images of Parker et al.'s Contact 2 show no features "that could be interpreted as having an obvious or unambiguous littoral origin."  Instead, the contact in places forms a "lobate, south-facing front".  Even in Viking images, this contact generally reveals the same morphology [5].  Parker et al. [2] suggested that such morphologies could have been formed by sediment-rich density flows within a body of water; however, they were not able to substantiate this possibility with identification of associated paleoshoreline features. Thus Tanaka [5] stated that "no clear evidence for standing bodies of water or ice sheets has been found in [Chryse and Acidalia Planitiae]; arguably, most of the other features in the northern plains previously cited as such evidence may be interpreted as mass flow landforms instead."  It would appear that when the interior plains unit formed, it behaved as a mass flow along its margins.  If free-standing bodies of water or ice apart from mud deposits had formed, the geomorphic evidence for them appears to have been lost. Obviously, a huge volume of sediment must have been deposited within the northern lowlands, and the interior plains unit may comprise much of this sediment.  The Valles Marineris and Chryse chaotic terrains and outflow channels have an estimated void space of ~6 x 10 6 km 3 [7].  These channels can be traced beneath the smooth surface of Chryse, using high-resolution gravity measurements, far into the northern plains [8].  Other extensive knobby terrains within the northern plains and along the highland/lowland boundary in northern Arabia Terra also were major contributors to northern plains sedimentation. Thick sedimentation within Acidalia and Utopia Planitiae is indicated by the distribution of buried impact-crater rims, lobate ejecta blankets, polygonally fractured plains [3], and perhaps the positive gravity anomaly associated with the Utopia basin [3].  Re-evaluation of MOLA Data for the Interior Plains Unit Contact.  Contact 2 [1] has a mean elevation of -3760 ± 560 m and an elevation range of ~4,700 m, as measured by [3].  This contact likely was once at a nearly constant elevation, as borne out by the remarkably even elevations of the contact (~±400 m) over extremely large distances, excluding excursions related to Tharsis, Elysium, and Isidis.  However, we argue here that significant modifications to the analysis of Head et al. [3] are required by geologic mapping constraints.  These refinements are important for a proper evaluation of the extent, volume, and tectonic deformation of the interior plains unit. Isidis basin.  The plains unit within Isidis, although similar in morphology to unit pi, is spatially distinct from it.  The units are more than 150 km apart, separated by a relatively high, broad area of older knobby plains material [6,9]. Elysium deposits. Northwest of Elysium Mons, the margin of channeled deposits was incorrectly identified as part of Contact 2 [1-3].  Instead, the interior plains unit contact appears to have been buried by the channeled deposits.  This change would remove the major tongue of elevation below -4000 m shown in [3]. Northern Alba Patera and Tempe Terra. At least two interior plains units appear to successively embay the northeastern Alba Patera shield (mapped previously as the contacts of the Arcadia and Vastitas Borealis Formations [10]).  The upper contact ranges from -3080 to -3310 m between 75 and 100 °W., whereas the lower contact ranges from -3320 to -3530 m (based on aerobraking and science phasing orbit MOLA tracks). Northwest of Alba Patera, the contact of the interior plains unit with the Alba Patera Formation is not clearly defined [9]. Following the approximate location of this contact, its elevation may remain at around -3000 m as on the northeast flank, rather than the elevations approaching -2,000 m indicated by [3]. Farther east along northern Tempe Terra, two INTERIOR LOWLAND PLAINS UNIT OF MARS:   K. L. Tanaka and W. B. Banerdt nested units also embay older cratered terrain rocks at -3880 to -4125 m elevations. These may be the same units as those northeast of Alba Patera; further work may elucidate their possible correlation. Acidalia Mensa.  A key outcrop of older material embayed by the interior northern plains unit in northern Acidalia Planitia forms Acidalia Mensa [1,11]. This tilted plateau is some several hundred meters high.  Here, the unit pi contact occurs at elevations ranging from ~-4,700 to ~-5,000 m.  This contact was not included in the Head et al. [3] survey. Tectonic Deformation of the Interior Plains Unit.  If it is assumed that the contact of the interior plains unit once closely outlined an equipotential surface, then it can be useful for measuring the cumulative tectonic deformation following unit emplacement. The -3760-m mean elevation closely matches much of the apparently relatively undisturbed parts of the contact and likely is accurate within a hundred meters or so. With this as a starting point, we will consider two major tectonic events indicated by the elevation data. 1. Isostatic adjustment to sedimentation.  Large sediment loads will cause lithospheric subsidence.  For example, on Earth, extensive work has gone into measuring and modeling the depression and rebound from the advance and retreat of ice sheets.  The zone of rebound for the Fennoscandian ice sheet is surrounded by a zone of subsidence; estimates indicate that the glacial load produced a depression surrounded by a peripheral bulge roughly of equal volumes [12]. Maximum rebound thus far has reached 830 m whereas peripheral subsidence has been up to 170 m.  Loading by the polar layered deposits on Mars may have produced depressions up to hundreds of meters deep, depending on the density of the deposits and the thickness of the lithosphere [13-14]. Emplacement of a huge body of fluid hundreds of meters deep on average within the northern plains likewise should have resulted in large amounts of subsidence of the loaded surface and in relatively modest uplift of the crust surrounding the deposit.  However, do to the finite viscosity of the mantle, this deformation would not have occurred instantaneously but could have taken tens of thousands of years, depending on mantle viscosity.  If the contact were formed quickly after filling but the load remained in place, the relative elevations of the unit at various points at present may provide indications of vertical movement, including interior depression and peripheral uplift.  As described above, the north polar basin appears to be depressed about 1,000 m in the vicinity of Acidalia Mensa relative to the interior plains unit contact. If the interior plains unit had a density of about 80% of that of the upper mantle and the unit is now fully compensated isostatically, then the north polar and Utopia basins were ~20% deeper prior to deposition of the interior plains unit. The channel floor rises about above the unit pi contact in the vicinity of the Mars Pathfinder landing site and then lowers ~200 to 300 m below the contact across a few hundred kilometers [15] This apparent hump in southern Chryse Planitia may result from uplift surrounding the sediment fill.  Such uplift may also explain the ~200 to 300 m tilting of the Isidis plains unit contact upward toward Utopia Planitia as well [9].  Adjustments along the unit pi contact may vary in sign and magnitude depending on the local load distribution and lithospheric structure. Head et al [3] observed a series of subtle slope changes paralleling the margins of Alba Patera and southern Utopia Planitia, which they interpreted to result from stillstands of a receding ice or water body. Alternatively, reactivation of buried tectonic or basin ring structures could explain the features. In Fennoscandia, irregularities in rebound occur along fault structures and other bedrock discontinuities [12]. In an ocean scenario in which the lowland basin was filled with free water for a substantial length of time, rebound should have occurred if the water was removed by evaporation/sublimation and was not retained locally in the aquifer.  Given a ~3:1 density ratio between the ocean and the upper mantle, deeper parts of the basin should have rebounded several hundred meters.  The overall volume of the ocean (above the sediment) would have been about 30% greater than the present void [3], or about 1.8 x 10 7 km 3.  The lack of evidence for submergence of Acidalia Mensa, already ~1 km below the interior plains unit contact, is even further at odds with the ocean hypothesis if consideration is given to the subsidence that the ocean load should have caused at Acidalia Mensa. 2. Alba Patera uplift.  As noted previously, uplift at Alba Patera of two interior unit contacts indicates uplift following initial embayment of the Alba shield and additional uplift following at least one more sedimentary embayment.  The first episode produced up to at least ~250 m of uplift, whereas the second episode produced nearly 450 m of uplift.  It would appear that either the initial uplift occurred rapidly while the interior plains unit remained in a fluid state or that two episodes of plains-filling sedimentation took place. References:  [1] Parker T.J. et al. (1989) Icarus 82, 111. [2] Parker T.J. et al. (1993) JGR 98, 11061. [3] Head J.W. et al. (1999) Science 286, 2134. [4] Malin M.C. and Edgett K. (1999) GRL 26, 3049. [5] Tanaka K.L. (1997) JGR 102, 4131. [6] Tanaka K.L. (1997) LPSC 28, 1411. [7] Carr M.H. (1987) LPSC 18, 155. [8] Zuber M.T. et al. (2000) Science, in press. [9] Tanaka K.L. (2000) this volume. [10] Tanaka K.L. and Scott D.H. (1987) USGS Map I-1802C. [11] Scott D.H. and Tanaka K.L. (1986) USGS Map I1802A. [12] Mörner N.-A. (1980) in Earth Rheol., Isos., Eus., 251. [13] Zuber M.T. et al. (1998) Science 282, 2053. [14] Smith D.E. et al. (1999) Science 284, 1495. [15] Skinner J. and Tanaka K.L. (2000) this volume. 
