 Correspondence and Least Squares Analyses of Soil and Rock Compositions for the Viking Lander 1 and Pathfinder Sites.  K. W. Larsen1, R. E. Arvidson1, B. L. Jolliff1, B. C. Clark2  1Washington University (Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, St. Louis, MO 63130, larsen@wundow.wustl.edu), 2Lockheed Martin Aerospace (Denver, CO 80202).  Introduction.  Correspondence analysis (CA) is a dual Q- and R- mode factor analysis that allows simultaneous visualization of relationships between normalized samples and variables [1].  The usefulness of the technique is first illustrated with an analysis of a simulated feldspar compositional data set and then applied to analysis among variables and samples for compositions obtained for Viking Lander 1 soils and Pathfinder rocks and soils.  The results from the feldspar test case confirm CA's usefulness in analyzing compositional data sets, despite concerns about closed data sets [2]. Method.  Viking 1 Lander soil compositions were measured by the X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer (XRFS) [3] and the Pathfinder rocks and soils by the xray mode of the Alpha Proton X-ray Spectrometer (APXS) [4].  For the Martian data set, the first two factors capture 90% of the variance.  On the basis of the distribution of sample points in factor space, three geologically plausible end-members were chosen to examine mixing relationships.  First, on the basis of telescopic and orbital spectral reflectance and emission data [5,6,7], a mafic end-member was derived by averaging the basaltic shergottites (EETA79001, Shergotty, Zagami, and QUE94201).  Second, an extrapolation of the Pathfinder rock compositions to zero sulfur content, on the assumption that all the sulfur is due to a soil coating, yields an andesitic end-member [4].  Finally, a hypothetical, salt-rich end-member (a halide-kieserite mixture) was constructed to account for the high sulfur and magnesium contents in Viking 1 duricrust samples [8]. Errors in the compositional analyses are significant for some elements.  Since we know of no formal procedure for handling errors in CA, we used a Monte Carlo approach to evaluate the effects of the errors.  New compositional data sets were computed based on the reported errors and the assumption that the errors were uncorrelated and normally distributed.  One thousand such data sets were created and CA applied to each.  The resulting factor loadings were averaged and root-mean-square errors calculated.  Analysis of these results indicates that the general relationships between samples and variables are unchanged.  Our results and conclusions take the results of these error measurements into account. Results.  When CA is applied to the augmented data set, the first two factors account for 98% of the variance.  Data projected onto the plane defined by these two factors fall within the mixing triangle defined by the end-members.  Further examination of the higher dimensional patterns shows that the sample points are systematically displaced from the mixing triangle plane in the same general direction as the Fe variable vector.  Inclusion of an Fe-oxide (e.g., hematite or maghemite) as a reasonable fourth end-member creates a mixing tetrahedron that encapsulates the data.   The Viking 1 soils and Pathfinder soils and rocks all cluster very near the shergottite-andesite mixing line in all cases where these end-members were included in the data set.  This implies that aluminosilicates dominate the surface composition of Mars, a conclusion also reached through analysis of Thermal Emission Spectrometer (TES) data from Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) [9].  Furthermore, the CA analyses suggest that the Viking 1 soils have a greater affinity to the andesite end-member than the Pathfinder soils.  This is contrary to the interpretation based upon SiO2-SO3 variations, e.g. [10, 11, 12], which imply that the Viking-1 soils are dominated by a Shergottite rock component.    Error-weighted least squares (LS) mixing analysis of the data allows us to investigate the relative proportions of compositional components selected on the basis of CA [13].  For these LS analyses, Viking-1 soil compositions were normalized to 95% for the major elements (the average sum for the elements common to Viking-1 and Pathfinder data sets; Pathfinder data normalized as in [4]).   The LS analyses, using different combinations of the end-members, support the idea that the soils consist not only of comminuted local rocks, but also Mg-S-rich evaporite and ferric oxide components, and possiby a common, windblown soil component [11, 12].  Similar to the CA results, LS analysis using four end-members (Shergottite basalt, Pathfinder andesite, salt-rich, and Fe-oxide) indicate that the Viking-1 soils represent a higher andesite/basalt ratio than the Pathfinder soils (Figure 1); however, we emphasize that this result stems from consideration of all available major element data, including, very importantly, values reported for MgO.  The Pathfinder rock trend, from the 'soil-free' andesite end-member to the soil covered sample A8 (Scooby Doo), intersects the soil trend at a composition of approximately 50% basaltic shergottite and 40% andesite.  A simple interpretation of this intersection of trends is that this is the composition of the wind-blown cap that is visually apparent on the Pathfinder rocks.  The implied windblown soil composition is more basalt-like, thus we infer the rock components of VikingCA and LS analyses of Martian Rocks and Soils:  K. W. Larsen et al.  1 soils to be more andesitic on average, as also inferred from CA results. Conclusions.   On the basis of CA and LS analyses, which incorporate compositional trends involving all major oxides analyzed at Viking-1 and Pathfinder sites, soils at these sites are composed of a mixture of local weathered materials, Mg-S-rich salt mixture, and a windblown, globally homogenous dust, which includes silicate and Fe-oxide components that vary independently, as also concluded by [12].  The soils at the Viking-1 site contain a greater proportion of local materials than the Pathfinder site, and the local materials may be derived from a relatively andesitic source.  Correspondence analysis provides a powerful quicklook tool for future missions dealing with large, multidimensional data sets, especially when combined with least squares mixing techniques to test inferred components.   Acknowledgments.  Support for this work was provided by NASA grant NAGW-3870 (REA).  We thank Hap McSween for providing a preprint of McSween and Keil (2000).  References: [1] Reyment, R. and Joreskog, K.G. (1993) Applied Factor Analysis in the Natural Sciences. [2] Aitkinson, J. (1986) The Statistical Analysis of Compositional Data. [3] Clark et al. (1982) JGR, 87, 10,059-10,067. [4] Reider et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1771-1776. [5] Lodders (1998) Meteoritics and Planetary Science, 33 A183-190, [6] Soderblom L. A. (1992) Mars. [7] Christensen (2000) JGR, In Press, [8] Clark, B. and Van Hart, D. (1981) Icarus, 45, 370378. [9] Christensen et al. (2000a) JGR, In Press, [10] Baird, A. and Clark, B. (1981) Icarus 45, 113123. [11] Morris, R. (1999) LPSCXXX, #1151. [12] McSween, H. and Keil, K. (2000) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, in press. [13] Korotev et al. (1995) JGR, 100, 14,403-14,420. Rock Components, 4 component mix 020 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 Pathfinder Andesite Sh erg ott it e B as alt windblown soil R   = 0.98 A2  (after deployment) A7 (Yogi) A16  (Wedge) A18 (H. Dome) A17 (Shark) A3 (B. Bill)C9 (bulk) C5, C13 duricrust C6 deep fines Viking 1 Pathfinder (P/F) soils P/F rock + soil Linear (P/F rock + soil) Linear (P/F soils) 2 R   = 0.97 2 A8 (Scooby Doo) Figure 1.  Least Squares mixing results for Viking-1 soils and Pathfinder soils and rocks.  Plot based on fourcomponent mixing analysis: two rock components (average Shergottite basalt and Pathfinder andesite), evaporite, and Fe oxide.  Only the rock components are plotted.  Correlation coefficients and linear regression lines are for Pathfinder soils (solid line) and Pathfinder rocks (dashed line), which include soil coatings.  A simple interpretation of the plot is that the intersection of the two "trends" marks the mixture of rock components in windblown soil.  This composition is more shergottite-rich than Pathfinder or Viking-1 soils, which implies that rock components at both of these sites are more andesitic. 
