 THE SEARCH FOR LIFE ON MARS IN SURFACE SAMPLES: LESSONS FROM THE 1999 MARSOKHOD FIELD TEST.  H.E. Newsom 1, J.L. Bishop2, C. Cockell2, T. Roush2, and J.R. Johnson3, 1Institute of Meteoritics and Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131 (Newsom@unm.edu), 2NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, 3United States Geological Survey, Flagstaff, AZ 86001.   Introduction:  The Marsokhod 1999 field experiment provided a chance to test procedures using a variety of instruments that could be useful in the search for evidence of life on Mars [1].  As part of the rock sampling and analysis strategy [2,3], an effort was made to search for samples that could possibly represent environments suggested for evidence of life.  This search identified a number of candidate rocks for in situ study with spectroscopy, and included the successful identification and collection of a sample with cryptoendolithic organisms [4]. Exobiological sample selection criteria for a Mars rover:  The selection criteria for exobiological analysis are based on two principal considerations:  First, the current environmental conditions on Mars and the expected biological attributes of organisms capable of surviving that environment.  Second, a knowledge of past surface and atmospheric conditions on Mars, the life that might inhabit these environments, and the signature that it might leave.  Under current conditions on Mars, micro-environments that might potentially be more clement in the surface regolith are represented by the chasmolithic (in cracks), hypolithic (under rocks) and endolithic (subsurface of rocks) communities.  Exploration and recognition of life in these habitats requires the ability to sample within and below rocks.  An example of a possible exfoliating rind or crust was observed on the rock Chimp during the Pathfinder mission.  Other habitats that support life, that are relatively accessible, and that may be significant for Mars might be near subsurface habitats  and evaporitic deposits.  Chemosynthetic communities could also exist, although the deep subsurface habitat of these organisms is likely to make them inaccessible for rover analysis. Marsokhod Field Test Results:  During the 1999 Marsokhod field exercise an attempt was made to select samples with possible exobiological interest.  The Marsokhod camera has an intrinsic resolution more than 3 times better than the Pathfinder IMP camera and the camera was mounted somewhat lower, and closer to the surface.  The height of the Marsokhod camera allows high resolution imagery with a good perspective of the "workspace area" in front of the rover within reach of the arm, and in the region where selection of targets for spectral acquisition could be easily accomplished.  Figure 1. Pan Camera Marsokhod image of the "endolith" sample.  By the second day of the field test high resolution images of the rocks in the near field of view of the rover became available [cf. 1], and these pictures were further improved by image processing techniques, including unsharp masking.  The full resolution of the Marsokhod camera (0.3 mrad/pixel) is still less than that of the human eye (0.2 mrad/pixel). These data, however, provided sufficient detail to allow identification of rock samples of biological interest using simple criteria based on morphological and color characteristics.  The criteria included: 1) rocks with veins that could be due to hydrothermal activity, 2) visible fossillike forms, 3) evidence of possible surficial life forms (such as lichen), and 4) evidence for possible endolithic life forms, (in the form of greenish coloring near rock surface fractures), that could be related to sub-surface layers in the rocks.  Several interesting samples were identified in the processed pan images that possibly met these criteria although the observed features were only marginally visible [4].  One of the samples appeared to have a slight green tinge that was associated with the edge of a surficial layer on the rock, as if a piece of the layer had broken off revealing the green material underneath (Figure. 1).  This sample was therefore identified as possibly having evidence for endolithic organisms.  The sample, was selected for acquisition of a visible/near infrared spectrum, and later analysis of these spectra revealed signatures of chlorophyll (see below).  A rock sample containing these endoliths was collected for subsequent laboratory analysis.  Exfoliated green area  MARSOKHOD FIELD TEST BIOLOGY: H.E. Newsom et al.  Analytical results:  Visible/NIR spectra of the endolith-bearing sample collected by the rover were measured in the field, then subsequently in the laboratory.  The exact sample identified by the remote science team could not be identified by the field team.  A proxy sample, exhibiting a green coloration in localized regions, was selected for further measurements during the field operations and returned for more detailed characterization.  During the field test a spectrum was obtained of a portion of the rock surface containing the greenish region using an artificial light source.  This spectrum is shown in Figure 2, and samples both the bulk mineralogy of the rock and any organisms contained within an area of ~7 cm2, down to a depth of a few mm.  The visible/NIR spectra contain a band near 0.68 µm due to a chlorophyll absorption, bands associated with water near 1.4 and 1.9 µm and bands characteristic of carbonates at ~2.3 and 2.5 µm.  The carbonate features are typical for rocks in the area [2]. Raman spectroscopy in the laboratory, simulating a remote measurement technique also detected evidence of carotenoids in samples from the same area.  Furthermore, seven peaks characteristic of dolomite were detected in the scan, confirming the results of the petrographic characterization.  Ground truth petrology and biology of the "endolithic" sample:  Based on petrographic analysis of a thin-section, the rock is an altered calc-silicate probably formed by metamorphism and alteration from a siliceous dolomite protolith [2].  Microorganisms in the rock were studied and identified by light microscopy and epifluorescence microscopy.  The subsurface layer of the rock is inhabited by a community of coccoid Chroococcidioposis cyanobacteria.  This genus of cyanobacteria is a typical member of many cryptoendolithic communities.  On Mars the depth at which a search might be directed for biominerological signatures of past cryptoendolithic life will be influenced by the rock's origin.  Also detected at a depth of several millimeters below the subsurface green layer of the Marsokhod "Endolith" rock is an orange-red layer that possesses a carotenoid component.  The lack of a distinctive microbial population in the layer may suggest that this layer is made up of carotenoids leached from the community above it.  The rock is also inhabited by an epilithic (surface) lichen of unknown composition.   Lessons from field tests:  The lessons learned from the attempts to identify biological material associated with rocks during the rover experiments have great application to future Mars missions.  Both rover instrument design and operational strategies are important for identifying samples of biological importance.  An important lesson from our experience is that the search for visual evidence of biological activity in a fashion similar to a field biologist requires color stereo imagery at a higher resolution than the IMP camera on Pathfinder.  Because the available data that can be transmitted is very limited, one solution is to concentrate on the images of areas close to the rover with the highest possible resolution and stereo coverage.  Optimizing the amount and type of allowable compression also requires substantial testing by the science team, but has large payoffs in reducing the data volume.  Our results also suggest that autonomous identification of sampling targets and spectral features in images can greatly shorten the required number of daily cycles required to study interesting samples [5].  Figure 2. The visible/NIR reflectance spectrum of the "Endolith" rock surface measured in the field during the rover test, labeled "Exposed Rock Surface", is compared to reflectance spectra measured in the laboratory of internal portions of the returned rock and other samples   Acknowledgements: We thank Howell Edwards and Emma Newton for Raman spectroscopy work, the Science Project Manager Carol Stoker and the Deputy Manager Nathalie Cabrol, the engineering field team led by Hans Thomas, and the local engineering teams, led by the Project Manager John Schreiner.  References:  [1] Stoker, C. et al., J. Geophys. Res., submitted, 1999. [2] Johnson., J.R. et al., J. Geophys. Res., submitted, 1999. [3] Gazis, P. and T. Roush, J. Geophys. Res., submitted, 1999 [4] Newsom, H., et al., J. Geophys. Res., submitted, 1999. [5] Roush, T.L., et al. (1999) LPS XXX, #1586. 
