 HIGH-RESOLUTION THERMAL INERTIA MAPPING FROM THE MARS GLOBAL SURVEYOR THERMAL EMISSION SPECTROMETER. M T Mellon1, B M Jakosky2, H H Kieffer3, and P R Christensen4, 1Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, 80309-0392 (mellon @argyre.colorado.edu), 2Department of Geological Sciences and Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, 3U. S. Geological Survey, Flagstaff, AZ, 4Department of Geology, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.    Introduction:  The Thermal Emission Spectrometer (TES) onboard the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft (MGS) has obtained high spatial resolution (approximately 3 km) temperature observations of the martian surface. Diurnal cycles in the surface temperature are strongly dependent on the thermal and physical properties of the top several centimeters of the "soil".  Many factors have an effect on temperature including albedo, dust opacity, and atmospheric pressure, but thermal inertia is the key property in controlling these temperature oscillations. Thermal inertia is defined as a combination of thermal conductivity k , density ρ  , and heat capacity c :  I k c≡ ρ .  It represents the ability of the subsurface to conduct and store heat energy away from the surface during the day and to return that heat energy to the surface through the night.  Deriving and understanding the thermal inertia of a surface can help to identify the small-scale characteristics of that surface. Fine grained and loosely packed material typically exhibits a low value of thermal inertia, while higher values are common for rocks and exposed bedrock. The thermal inertia of a region of the martian surface is generally related to properties such as particle size, degree of induration, abundance of rocks, and exposure of bedrock, including combinations of these properties within the field of view. Therefore, both global and local mapping of thermal inertia provides insight into the physical character of the martian surface and the geologic processes that have formed and modified that surface. We use TES observations of surface temperature to derive and map the thermal inertia of the martian surface layer. Observations:  In its mapping phase the MGS spacecraft is in a nearly circular 400 km polar orbit with equator crossing at approximately 2AM and 2PM local Mars time. The TES is primarily nadir pointing, making surface observations every 2 seconds during both day and night. Each of six 8.3 mrad-IFOV detectors, arranged 2x3, provide a nominal 3 km x 3 km resolution at the martian surface. Unfortunately, difficulties in achieving the desired mapping orbit have forced the spacecraft to orbit in a direction opposite to the original design. As a result the TES image motion compensation has been disabled and the field of view of each detector is smeared approximately 6 km downtrack.  Global coverage is expected throughout the course of the mission. Three bore-sighted instruments include a 6 to 50 µ m spectrometer, a 0.3 to 2.7 µ m visible broadband channel, and a 5.5 to 100 µ m thermal bolometer (see Christensen et al., 1992 for a full description of the TES instrument). Temperatures can be determined from the measured spectral radiance to obtain an estimate of the surface kinetic temperature and from the thermal bolometer to obtain a planetary brightness temperature. In the present work, TES orbits 1583-3814 are used, which cover the range of LS 1030 to 1960. These data were obtained between March and August of 1999.  Methodology:  We develop a technique for deriving thermal inertia from single nighttime temperature measurements. As with previous efforts, our method relies on finding the thermal inertia that produces model temperatures that best fit the observations. In short, we precompute a large number of diurnal temperature cycles from a numerical thermal model for a variety of physical conditions to generate a lookup table. We then correlate each temperature observation with other data (e.g., latitude, albedo, time of day, etc.) and interpolate through this lookup table to find the best fitting thermal inertia.  The thermal model consists of a standard surface and subsurface thermal conduction model with appropriate boundary conditions. The lowest subsurface layer is non-conducting. The surface boundary condition is a balance of subsurface conduction, insolation, thermal emission to space, and downward thermal emission from the atmosphere. Seasonal CO2 condensation is also included. The model also incorporates solar and thermal infrared radiative transfer in a dusty, CO2 atmosphere. It determines attenuation of solar radiation incident on the surface, emission of thermal radiation by the atmosphere (downward onto the surface and upward from the top of the atmosphere), and attenuation of thermal radiation emitted by the surface before reaching space. This atmospheric THERMAL INERTIA OF MARS:  M. T. Mellon et al.  model also includes the potential effects of condensation of CO2 within the atmosphere, convective instability, and sensible heat exchange with the surface. Uncertainty in the derived thermal inertia is introduced at three primary stages: in the measured temperature, in the thermal model that is used to generate the lookup table, and in the interpolation scheme. For a model-dependent derivation of this level of complexity, uncertainty can only be estimated. Christensen et al. [1992] report expected instrument noise levels for the bolometer and spectrometer. In practice, spectrometer noise levels are slightly higher than anticipated due to spacecraft electronic interference. Thermal model performance is tested by comparing results with analytic solutions of special endmember cases and to asymptotic behavior. Interpolation error is evaluated by comparing direct thermal calculations to interpolated approximations. Formal uncertainties are estimated to be around 6% for the bolometric thermal inertia and around 16.9% for the spectrometer-based thermal inertia; however, comparisons and analysis suggest these actual uncertainties are much lower. Global Mapping:  Data from the mapping mission has been used to produce a global map at ¼ degree per pixel resolution (15 km per pixel at the equator) with 63% coverage in the region between 50 degrees South and 70 degrees North latitude. An overall global pattern is observed that is similar to Viking-era thermal inertias; large low thermal inertia regions are observed in Tharsis, Arabia, and Elysium. Thermal inertias in these regions are typically less than about 150 J m-2 K-1 s-1/2 with a distinct boundary. Higher thermal inertias are observed elsewhere and have been interpreted as possibly containing more surface rocks or exposures of bedrock, larger particle sizes, and/or indurated fines forming a duricrust. Global correlation between the TES bolometric thermal inertia and TES albedo shows a clear trimodal behavior. In addition to the two high-thermalinertia/low-albedo and low-thermal-inertia/highalbedo modes present in the Viking IRTM thermal inertia analysis, a new third mode of moderate-to-high thermal inertia and an intermediate albedo is observed. Clearer atmospheric conditions during TES observations, better resolution and accuracy, and an unnoticed hint of this mode in Viking analysis suggests that the third mode does not represent a change in the surface of  Mars, but rather an improved observation. This third mode maps a distinct surface unit, with significant areal coverage, that surrounds the low thermal inertia regions. This unit is more abundant at lower elevations. Both Viking landing sites map onto this unit, while the Pathfinder landing site has a slightly higher thermal inertia. Duricrust and indurated soil material has been observed at all the landing sites and may represent this unit. The generally low elevation of the new unit suggests that atmospheric processes may play a role in the formation of this unit. We favor a possible genetic relation where low thermal inertia regions transition to the newly observed unit by induration.  High resolution thermal inertia mapping has been performed for several localized areas. Impact crater rims and intracrater dunes show higher thermal inertias than the surrounding terrain. The thermal inertia of intracrater dune deposits and wind streaks can be related to average particle size for a loose windblown material. Channels consistently show higher thermal inertias than the surrounding terrain. Mapped geologic units sometime correlate with spatial variations in thermal inertia, suggesting some relationship between the tens to hundreds of meter-scale morphology and the centimeter-scale thermal layer in these regions. Generally, at the present 3 km resolution, spatial variations in thermal inertia tends to reflect the local geomorphology, though for many areas there is no correlations. While the former may be the most informative about geologic processes, the later may be the most intriguing. 
