 CHEMICAL CONSTRAINTS ON THE ORIGIN OF MARTIAN GLOBAL DUST AND ITS PROCESSING INTO SOIL.  Harry Y. McSween, Jr.1 and Klaus Keil2, 1Department of Geological Sciences, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996-1410, mcsween@utk.edu, 2Hawaii Institute of Geophysics and Planetology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822, keil@kahana.pgd.hawaii.edu. Introduction:  The Martian regolith is the only accessible planetary material, besides Earth's, that has been exposed to hydrolytic, atmospheric, and possibly even biologic (?) weathering processes.  Compositional similarity of Martian soils at different locations has led to speculation that winds have homogenized, distributed, and deposited a global blanket of dust.  So far, however, the soil has defied attempts to determine its origin.  Mineralogic information is almost completely absent, because of spectral masking by finegrained ferric oxides.  In the absence of other measurements, we must rely on soil chemistry to infer how this dynamic geologic unit formed and what local and temporal processes might have caused changes in its composition.     Method:  We have renormalized Mars Pathfinder APXS [1] and Viking XRF [2] soil analyses (based on 97% and 94.6% total oxides, respectively, assuming all Fe is ferric) to facilitate comparison of these data sets.  When oxides are plotted versus SO3, thePathfinder and Viking data show distinct trends.  We interpret the Pathfinder soil trend as resulting from mixture of local andesitic rock fragments with fines.  The Viking trend apparently results from addition of sulfate/chloride cement to fines.  For most oxides, these trends intersect approximately at a common composition, thought to represent a global dust that has been homogenized by pervasive aeolian activity.  This common composition is most like the Pathfinder soil that contains the least rock fragments (highest sulfur) and the Viking fines that contain the smallest amount of cement (lowest sulfur).     Source rocks:  Although it might be misleading to use terrestrial sediments derived from volcanic rocks as a chemical analogy for Martian soil, the relative leaching of major elements from weathered terrestrial basalts is not greatly influenced by primary mineralogy, bulk chemical composition, or climatic conditions [3].  Molar ternary diagrams of Nesbitt and Young [4], involving combinations of Al 2O 3, CaO, Na2O, K2O, FeOT (total Fe expressed as FeO), and MgO, illustrate the effects of chemical weathering (arrows in Fig. 1) of basaltic shergottites and the Pathfinder sulfur-free andesitic rock [5].  These diagrams suggest that the martian global dust composition could be derived from weathering of basalt, but not from andesite.     Implications:  This observation has important implications for the petrology of martian surface units.  It may suggest that the planet's surface is dominated by basalt, as previously hypothesized based on spectral reflectance studies [6].  If significant parts of the surface are covered by andesitic rocks, as suggested by thermal emission spectra [7], then these rocks apparently played little or no role in forming the global dust, perhaps because they might have erupted after the soil formation epoch.  If significant amounts of water are implicated in the weathering process, then the martian soils might be ancient.     Although the global dust in each diagram of Fig. 1 is displaced in a direction appropriate for chemical weathering of basalt, the displacement is small compared to terrestrial basalt weathering products.  This might reflect the fate of water at the end of the martian alteration process.  If a hydrous fluid on Mars simply evaporated at the completion of the weathering cycle, all the dissolved components not already transported away would be MARS SOIL:  H. Y. McSween, Jr. and K. Keil left behind, so that chemical separations would be minimal.     Alteration mechanisms:  Three proposed alteration mechanisms for producing martian soils (summarized by [8]) have found fairly wide acceptance.  Palagonitization of volcanic or impact glasses produces poorly crystalline or amorphous materials that provide the best spectral analogs for martian soils.  Alteration of rocks and glasses by hydrothermal fluids heated by magmas or impacts is a conceptually similar process but usually produces well crystalline materials.  Volcanic exhalations of S and Cl species reacting with atmospheric water vapor can produce an acid fog, which reacts in turn with rocks.  The chemical effects of all three processes have been studied in natural or laboratory systems.  When these chemical trends are projected onto the molar variation diagrams, only palagonitization vectors resemble weathering trends defined by martian soils.     Processing into soils:  Processing of the global dust into soils involves local or temporal changes, such as admixture of local rock fragments or cementation by salts.  In addition, other chemical fractionations have apparently occurred.  The most noticeable is fractionation of Fe and Ti, probably by aeolian sorting of dense Fe-Ti oxides, which tend to resist abrasion and weathering. References: [1] Rieder R. et al. (1997) Science 278, 17711774.  [2] Clark B. C. et al. (1982) JGR 87, 10,059-10,067.  [3] Nesbitt H. W. and Wilson R. E. (1992) Am. J. Sci. 292, 740-777.  [4] Nesbitt H. W. and Young G. M. (1984) GCA 48, 1523-1534.  [5] McSween H. Y. et al. (1999) JGR 104, 8679-8715.  [6] Mustard J. F. et al. (1993) JGR 98, 3387-3400.  [7] Christensen P. et al. (1999) GSA abstr. programs 31, A131.  [8] Bell J. F. et al. (1999) JGR, in press. Pathfinder soil Viking 1 soil Sulfur-free rock Basaltic shergottites Weathering trend Al2O3 CaO+Na2O K2O Al2O3 Al2O3 CaO+Na2O+K2O +K2O+MgO CaO+Na2O FeO FeO+MgO Plagioclase K-feldspar Smectite I llite Kaolinite, Chlorite Pigeonite, Augite Kaolinite Kaolinite Smectite Fe-smectite Fe-smectite Feldspar Illite Chlorite Chlorite Illite Feldspar Augite Pigeonite Augite Pigeonite Fe-Ti oxides Fe-Ti oxides Fig. 1 
