 A PRELIMINARY RE-CLASSIFICATION OF SURFACE MATERIALS AT THE MARS PATHFINDER LANDING SITE USING RECALIBRATED IMP SUPERPAN DATA  P. D. Martin1, J. F. Bell III1,1Center for Radiophysics and Space Research, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, martin@marswatch.tn.cornell.edu; S. L. Murchie2, O. S. Barnouin-Jha2, 2The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD.  Introduction: Results from the preliminary published mineralogical and geochemical investigations of the Mars Pathfinder (MPF) landing site show that fundamental questions remain to be addressed [e.g.,1,2,3,4], related to (i) the quantitative constraint of the physical/chemical composition and mineralogy of rocks and soils, (ii) the potential genetic connection between rock coatings and surface/airborne fines, (iii) the degree of control on the observed composition of soils and rocks by mixing processes, and (iv) the role of weathering or alteration processes on the surface properties. To potentially answer these questions, we are performing a study of the composition, formation, and evolution of surface materials at the MPF site, focused on soils and dust, using co-registered and recalibrated SuperPan imaging sequences from the Imager for Mars Pathfinder (IMP). A similar study focused on the rock properties can be found in [5,6]. As a preliminary step, we report here the results of a classification of spectral data extracted from a region of interest of an IMP panorama.  Objectives: Motivated by previous MPF investigations working with other IMP data sets [4], we designed the following scientific objectives for the SuperPan data analysis: . Accurately characterize the full range of spectral, compositional, and mineralogical diversity of the Mars Pathfinder landing site . Correlate mineralogical, compositional, and geomorphologic information . Define the roles played by weathering and/or mixing processes that altered the surface materials during both past and present climatic regimes . Identify the evolutionary stages of the sedimentary (or other) geologic processes that created and modified soils and dust at the site  Data Processing: The SuperPan is a 12-color panoramic mosaic of ~83% of the MPF site in all 15 narrow-band filters (440 to 1000 nm) [7]. The data sets consist of 1785 images constituting 595 complete image cubes [8], divided into eight regions ("octants" S0181-S0188), and mapped and registered using USGS ISIS software [e.g.,9,10]. The SuperPan data set contains percent-level, frame-toframe and octant-to-octant differences in relative colors that significantly affect (and can overwhelm) the interpretation of key diagnostic spectral variations [5]. We estimate that calibration to better than 0.25% (relative) or 5% (absolute) is required in order to use laboratory and theoretical spectral mixture data to infer the physical, chemical, or mineralogical nature of the surface materials. Data used in this study correspond to the current version of the SuperPan data set, but recalibrated in order to correct registration and relative color artifacts, each octant being treated one at a time. Color ratio images are calculated using 670-nm mosaics in each eye as a base, to highlight registration and relative color artifacts. As required, individual frames are re-registered relative to this base to within half a pixel. For each filter, radiance factors in each frame are then corrected multiplicatively until a ratio to 670-nm images yields a seamless mosaic. The average far-field (least affected by scattered light from the spacecraft) is used as an anchor. Red/blue ratio and strengths of other diagnostic spectral parameters [5,6] are then calculated, and calibrations are refined further if frame-toframe artifacts appear. Octants are intercalibrated using relative spectra of clean, sunlit surfaces in overlapping parts of the scene, or alternatively using comparable clean, well-illuminated locations on the airbags or ramps. In any case, multiple spots are used as consistency checks. The fully corrected Rock Garden octant (S0184) is the reference.  Data Set and Geological Setting: The following analysis is performed on the left-eye data of the "S0188" octant (1039x1191x8 band image-cube). This view, a portion of the quadrant northeast of the lander, exhibits important spectral variance in the 440- and 670-nm channels [3]. The area includes a large variety of soil deposit materials (bright drift, darker soil of variable roughness, disturbed soil), some surface dust [4], and different classes of rocks [3]. The flat rocky surface called Scooby Doo is also a feature of interest in the scene.  Soil Classification: The well understood technique of Principal Components Analysis (PCA) [e.g., 11,12] forms the primary basis for the classification approach proposed here. PCA constrains the statistical behaviors among the spectral population to a few homogeneous spectral clusters related to specific spatial units. Nearly all of the spectral variance is carried along the first five components or axes, with the two principal axes bearing 99.7 % of the variance. Figure 1 plots the statistic data cloud along the SURFACE MATERIALS REVISITED AT PATHFINDER SITE:  P. D. Martin et al.  first two axes of spectral variance. The five units that are detected as representative of the spectral variability are: shaded rock surfaces (SR; red), dark rock surfaces (DR; green), bright exposed rock surfaces (BR; dark blue), bright soil (BS; yellow), and rockcoating soil (RC; cyan). Spectral variations of each unit is displayed in Figure 2, and Figure 3 shows their respective spatial distribution in the scene.   Figure 1: Statistical distribution for the first two principal axes of significant variance. The variance of the first factor, mostly associated with reflectance, is plotted along the horizontal axis. The variance of the second factor, which seems to reflect variations in the 800-to-1000-nm spectral slope, is plotted along the vertical axis.   Figure 2: Representative reflectance spectra of soil and rock units that characterize the "S0188" octant. BS is a soil unit that exhibits the highest visible reflectance and red/blue ratio, and a negative slope between 800 and 1000 nm. The flat rock-like surface of Scooby Doo is representative of this unit. The unit BR, which is similar to BS in visible reflectance and red/blue ratio, is poorly represented spatially. RC is a type of soil detected as bright deposit coating some rocks. The red/blue ratio is similar as for BR. However, this unit differs from BR and BS mostly by its flat 800-to-1000-nm slope. The rock unit DR exhibits a lower red/blue ratio than the three previous units, and presents an increased 800-to1000-nm negative slope. SR is a low-reflectance spectrally flat unit characteristic of the shaded sides of rocks.   Figure 3: Spatial location of each cluster superimposed on the 670-nm frame.  Further Analyses: Similar work will be performed using data from other SuperPan octants in order to address the first objective. These results will be correlated to the results obtained from the Pathfinder magnetic properties experiment, and to the latest available APXS elemental chemistry data. This investigation will be continued with mineralogic interpretations, sub-pixel linear Spectral Mixture Analysis (SMA) [e.g., 13], and abundance and detectability analyses, with proposed implications for the surface evolution at the MPF landing site.  References: [1] Smith, P. H., et al., Science, 278, 1758, 1997a. [2] Bridges, N. T., et al., Eos Trans. AGU, 78, F402, 1997. [3] McSween, H. Y. Jr., et al., JGR, 104, 8679, 1999. [4] Bell, J. F. III, et al., JGR, in press, 2000. [5] Murchie, S. L., et al., LPSC XXXI (this issue), 2000. [6] Barnouin-Jha, O. S., et al., LPSC XXXI (this issue), 2000. [7] Smith, P. H., et al., JGR, 102, 4003, 1997b. [8] Golombek, M. P., et al., JGR, 104, 8523, 1999. [9] Eliason, E. M., LPSC XVIII, 331, 1997. [10] Gaddis, L., et al., LPSC XVIII, 387, 1997. [11] Johnson, P. E., et al., Proc. of 15th LPSC, JGR, 90, C805, 1985. [12] Martin, P. D., et al., PSS, 44, 859, 1996. [13] Adams, J. B., et al., JGR, 91, 8098, 1986. 
