 SHIFTING WIND REGIMES AT MPF AS EVIDENCED BY WIND TAIL BEDDING.  S.M. Metzger, Dept. of Geological Sciences, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV  89557, metzger@scs.unr.edu.   Introduction: Wind tails are common in the sheltered areas behind rocks and pebbles at the Mars Pathfinder Ares Vallis landing site.  These features display a prominent and consistent pattern as they taper off toward the southwest at 217° [1,2]. This report will examine bedforms in the material found behind the rock "Barnacle Bill", as seen in a superresolution image product [3].  Those bedforms indicate that at least three distinct wind regimes are responsible for their development and, by implication, are records of episodic shifts in the climate over the MPF site.  Furthermore, the stratification of the wind tail is consistent with deposition and does not provide evidence that deflation has lowered the soil surface in this area [4].  The ground surface immediately west northwest of the lander is made up of a flat plane strewn with small rocks (less than 25 cm in height) and pebbles (less than 1 cm).  The flat planar surface is covered with fine pebbles or aggregates that give it a coarse appearance.  On the left side (as seen from the lander) of nearly every rock is an elongate pile of finely textured material that tapers away from the attached rock.  These features are identified as wind tails and are common on arid surfaces where the wind transport system is carrying less material than it is capable of.  Such accumulations are either deflationary or depositional.  As an originally broad sheet of wind-erodible material is nearly completely removed, the final remnants will persist solely behind protective wind barriers.  Conversely, the low energy setting found in the lee of such wind barriers is also where wind-carried material will drop out of transport and accumulate.  Ultimately, in a complex natural setting such as probably exists around MPF, both deflation and deposition are likely to occur in varying proportions as material eroded from an upwind source finds shelter behind a downstream rock neighbor.  Regardless, these wind tails are now relics of the dynamic association of processes with the environment in which they form. The wind tail behind the rock "Barnacle Bill" was well imaged by the Imager for Mars Pathfinder (IMP) on several dozen occasions.  Not only is this rock close enough to IMP (approximately 3 m) to provide excellent resolution in any single image but the abundant available images enabled a super-resolution product to be developed (fig. 1) [5].  The technique entails deconvolving individual frames and subsequent co-registration of the image stack.  This improves resolution between two and three times over that of individual frames, which have 1 mrad/pixel resolution [6].  Subsequent contrast enhancement for this study has revealed subtle bedding structures on the flank and upper surface of the wind tail (fig. 2). The tail behind Barnacle Bill extends approximately 30 cm, starting with an upwind width of 23 cm.  It appears to be trimmed by erosion along the southern flank that faces the spacecraft.  This reveals subparallel lineations due to undulation of the exposed face interpreted here to be slip face bedding.  The first set of beds begins at the rock and dip steeply to the southwest.  The second set follows a gentle, arcuate path and shows some indication of extending over to the erosion-trimmed northern flank of the tail.  The third set has a dip similar to the first set, extending until the tail tapers out completely.  The middle, arcuate set truncates the underlying steeper set and is interpreted to represent angular unconformity resulting from erosion.  The third bedding set develops toward the tail terminus as a thickening wedge on top of the gently dipping second set, until the tail itself tapers out.  Finally, low-amplitude ripples are found on the final downwind portion of the upper surface of the tail. Conclusions: The relationships of these lineations are consistent with a five-stage sequence of deposition and erosion.  (1) Barnacle Bill rested on a pre-existing surface essentially devoid of unconsolidated material and/or stabilized against wind erosion.  (2) Sustained upwind delivery of fine dust or dust aggregates from the northeast resulted in steep slip face deposits sheltered behind Barnacle Bill.  (3) A wind shift to the north removed the outer tail and sculpted its remnants into an ellipse corresponding to the new wind direction.  As the northerly wind vector lost strength, new and perhaps coarser material was able to accumulate in the rock's shadow.  The coarser grain size is suggested by the gentle repose angle and enduring strata "stair-steps" seen on the north flank.  (4) Sediment-ladened wind returns from the northeast to resume building the wind tail with finer, more cohesive material.  (5) "Recent" winds have been either sediment-starved or too strong to permit deposition.  Their primary effect has been to trim off both of the tail's lateral flanks and plane down the upper surface.  Waning winds would have developed the minor surface ripples by the reptation of silt or sand-sized aggregates. This preliminary study does not attempt to place dates on the interpreted wind events.  It would be over-reaching to do so with such a meager foundation.  However, relative time spans can be speculated.  Given that the first (= oldest) slip face beds extend nearly 10 cm in a roughly parallel orientation, environmental conditions are likely to have been constant throughout several depositional events.  General site observations and ASI-Met results [7] suggest that Ares Vallis is rarely subjected to regional dust-transporting winds, perhaps no more than a few per year.  Whereas wind vortices [7] and dust devils [8] are common at the site, their orientation relative to any one point is random, making such parallel deposits unlikely.  Conversely, brief intense erosive wind events MPF Wind Tail Bedding Structure:  S.M. Metzger  have been shown to quickly remove unconsolidated soil piles [9].  Therefore, dust devils may have provided the wind tail sculpting recorded in bed set #2.  Dust devils may not be the culprit behind the trimmed flanks, however.  The present flank orientation is directly downwind of the deflationary trough immediately upwind of Barnacle Bill.  Such a feature is common when a fluid strikes a nonerodible obstacle with a resulting horizontal roller vortex spinning off either side like a horseshoe (fig. 3).  Although common for "regular" wind, such horseshoe vortices are not known to develop in dust devil-obstacle interactions. Acknowledgements: Tim Parker produced and generously provided the superb super-resolution product that made this study possible.  Laurant Nguyen of the NASA Ames VIZ Virtual Reality Team spent valuable time explaining the full power, underutilized here, of the Mars Pathfinder VR data set developed under the VIZ team leadership of Eric Zbinden and Carol Stokes [10].  Without such excellent visual tools, geologists are crippled.  Finally, Hank Moore sparked my interest in piles of Martian dirt, fortunately!  References:  [1] Smith, P.H. et al. (1997) Sci. 278, 1758-1765.  [2] Bridges, N.T. et al. (1998) LPSC 29.  [3] Parker, T.J. (1999) personal communication.  [4] Golombek, M.P. (1999) LPSC 30.  [5] Parker, T.J. et al. (1998) LPSC 29.  [6] Smith, P.H. et al. (1997) JGR 102, 4003-4025.  [7] Scofield, J.T. et al. (1997) Sci. 278, 1752-1758.  [8] Metzger, S.M. et al. (1999) GRL 26, 2781-2784.  [9] Moore, H.J. (1985) JGR 90, D163-174.  [10] Stokes, C.R. et al. (1999) JGR 104, 8889-8906.    Figure 1 - Super-resolution of Barnacle Bill and Wind Tail  (image courtesy of T. Parker, 1999).    Figure 2 - Bedding Stucture in Wind Tail. Using simple contrast enhancement of the Parker super-resolution product (fig. 2a), bedding surface edges (green and blue lines) and ripples (black box) are revealed (fig. 2b).    Figure 3 - Roller Vortex Forming the Deflationary  Trough in Front of Barnacle Bill This idealized diagram explains why material is eroded from the upwind and lateral surfaces of the Barnacle Bill rock and wind tail feature. (image courtesy of the Ames VIZ Virtual Reality Team) 
