 THE PATHFINDER LANDING AREA IN MGS/MOC IMAGES.  P. J. Stooke1, 1Department of Geography, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5C2; pjstooke@julian.uwo.ca; www.uwo.ca/geog/faculty/stooke.htm Introduction:  The landing area of the Pathfinder spacecraft was imaged at roughly 3 m/pixel by the Mars Orbiter Camera (MOC) on the Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) spacecraft in April 1998.  The approximate landing area can be identified to within a few tens of meters by plotting azimuths to known horizon features. This study attempts to refine the lander position still further by identifying surface features in both Pathfinder panorama images and the MOC orbital images. A candidate location is described, 20 m east of the previous suggestion.  Future imaging at 1.5 m/pixel should clarify the identification of features still further.  This procedure may help determine the feasibility of locating the Viking landers or the Mars Polar Lander in MOC images Images:  This study makes use of two images.  The first (Figure 1) is a small detail from MOC image 25603.  The raw image was downloaded from PDS, destriped and processed for optimum feature identification in the Pathfinder vicinity.  The second (Figure 2) is a version of the Pathfinder Super Pan reprojected into a circular geometry approximating an overhead view. This is not an exact map view as it does not take into account areas hidden in depressions or the effects of undulating topography.  These geometric defects were somewhat reduced by referring to Figure 5 of [1], which uses stereoscopic ranging to establish the true distances to major features in the vicinity of Pathfinder. Figure 1.  Pathfinder landing area imaged by MGS/MOC.  Twin Peaks are at lower left.  The red box is the area of Figure 3.  Image width 2 km, red box is 300 m wide. Figure 2.  Pathfinder panorama reprojected to (very) approximately overhead geometry.  The spacecraft is at the centre, north is at top. Method:  The approximate location of Pathfinder was established by [2] from the intersection of azimuths to hills and crater rims on the horizon.  This location is plotted on Figure 3, which is an enlargement of the centre of Figure 1.  The mottled appearance of the ground in Figure 3 is interpreted here as due to the presence of numerous brighter drifts of dust or sand on a darker rock-covered surface.  Similar drifts and dunes are visible in many MOC images.  The general NW-SE trend of elongated bright patches in the MOC image is similar to the alignment of many such features in the Pathfinder panoramas [1], including the well-known Mermaid 'dune' feature (Mermaid itself is too small to be resolved in MOC images). Figure 3.  Immediate vicinity of Pathfinder.  The green dot is the landing site estimated in ref. [2]. The largest bright drift-like structures visible in Pathfinder images run roughly NW-SE from the north point on the horizon (60 m north of the lander) to an PATHFINDER IN MOC IMAGES:  P. J. Stooke area about 50 m ESE of the lander.  These distances are from Figure 5 of [1].  The strip of drifts is not continuous but is divided into two sub-parallel sections.  Figure 4 identifies these features on a sketch derived from Figure 2.  Figure 5 indicates possible identifications of these features on a sketch overlaid on Figure 3. Figure 4.  Sketch based on Figure 2 showing drifts or dunes (yellow) and the spacecraft (black/white).  Letters refer to features shown in Figure 5. Figure 5.  Green dot: the Ref. [2] MPF location estimate.  Red dot: new estimate based on tentative feature identification.  Yellow outlines: possible analogs to drifts/dunes in Figure 4.  Width 200 m. Results:  It will be obvious that these identifications are very tentative.  Numerous other positions for the lander were considered, but in all cases the number of possible matches was very much smaller.  A careful search was made in the MOC image for large boulders seen in the Pathfinder panorama, but no convincing identification could be made.  One correlation not apparent in Figures 4 and 5 is that large darker patches in MOC images in this area are almost always depressions, either mapped as such in Pathfinder topographic maps [1] or revealed in that paper to be areas unseen in the panoramas.  The lowest elevations in this region occur in a series of depressions south and east of the lander.  These areas are dark in the MOC image, and the ridge between them, clearly shown in topographic mapping in [1], is bright in the MOC view.  This bright ridge is rocky, not dune-like, indicating that in this area not all bright patches are necessarily dunes. One particularly interesting feature is the horizon feature A in Figure 4.  A appears to be a bright dune separate from and to the left of 'north Knob' (Figure 2). In the panorama A and B appear to be linked, and this is possible given the limited resolution.  However, it is also possible that A is the distinct bright feature further NNW than B, separated from B by a dark area (depression?) about 60 m across. B and C correlate with ragged bright markings in the MOC image, apparently members of the class of bright markings elongated NW-SE throughout this area.  C extends further SE in the MOC image, but this seems to correspond with low areas hidden behind C in the panoramas.  E is the dune behind the rock garden, seen only in Sojourner images.  F and G are small distant patches of bright material in the Pathfinder panorama, very tentatively matched on Figure 5.  They may in fact be more distant, and there are numerous candidates in MOC images. Conclusions:  The new lander position is about 20 m east of the location suggested in [2].  However, it is clear from this study that the early MOC images with resolutions of 3 m/pixel or more are inadequate to locate features the size of a lander and barely capable of identifying larger features seen in panoramas (except distant very large objects like Twin Peaks).  Given noise in images of the south polar region, finding the Mars Polar Lander in MOC images will be very difficult.  This study of the Pathfinder site is not yet conclusive but may help future efforts to identify the Viking, Pathfinder and Polar Lander sites.  If a lander is invisible, larger near-field features such as patches of dunes or drifts may still be found and may be sufficient to settle the issue. References:  [1]  Ward et al. (1999)  JGR-Planets 104:8555-8571.  [2]  Malin Space Science Systems/JPL information release, July 4, 1998. (Mars Global Surveyor website) 
