 COMPARISON OF TERRESTRIAL AEOLIAN ROCK TEXTURES TO THOSE AT THE MARS PATHFINDER LANDING SITE  N.T. Bridges, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology (MS 183-501, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109; nathan.bridges@jpl.nasa.gov); R. Greeley, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-1404; R.O. Kuzmin, Vernadsky Institute, Moscow, RUSSIA; J.E. Laity, California State University, Northridge, CA 91330.  Introduction      The Mars Pathfinder (MPF) landing site displays a diversity of geomorphic features.  Among these are drift deposits, wind tails, duneforms, ripple-like forms, ventifacts, crusted rocks, and soil horizons [13]  By analogy with comparable forms on Earth, it is believed that the Martian features were produced by aeolian processes.     Central to the understanding of these features is a similar detailed understanding of aeolian processes and landforms on Earth.  Toward this end, we are engaged in an ongoing effort to document and study aeolian features in California's Mojave Desert.  We find good analogs for the Pathfinder landing site.  These observations support the views that the Pathfinder landing site 1) exhibits many rock textures, including those in addition to ventifact flutes, that can be explained by aeolian abrasion, 2) has been scoured and modified by saltating sand-size material, and 3) has undergone deflation in some regions.  Here, we provide an overview of part of this study, that of aeolian-produced rock textures.  The rock textures are analogous to features at the Pathfinder site.  These observations show that wind on Mars, in addition to modifying the soils and producing fairly obvious ventifacts, is also capable of forming an array of rock textures that might otherwise be explained as having formed by non-aeolian processes.  Overview of Rock Textures   1) The picture above shows a basalt consisting of vesiclerich and vesicle-poor, feldspar-rich bands.  The vesicle-rich bands compose the troughs, with the vesicle-poor zones being ridge-formers.  The vesicles act as sites that the wind exploits and preferentially erodes.  Less erosion occurs where vesicle abundance is low and there are more hard, large feldspar grains.  This indicates that the apparent "layering" observed in some rocks at the Pathfinder landing site [4,5] could be flow banded laves whose banding has been exaggerated by aeolian scour.   2) Seen here are cross-cutting aeolian flutes (white arrow) and flow bands (black arrow) in basalt.  Unlike in picture 1, the flutes here have not exploited pre-existing flow banding, but have rather cut through it.  Possible cross-beds seen at the Pathfinder site could therefore be aeolian flutes superimposed on flow bands.      3) Many rocks in areas of the Mojave display an outer, metastable crust consisting of a fluted fabric, as seen above.  This is very similar in appearance to Chimp, Stimpy, and other rocks at the Pathfinder landing site.  In the Mojave examples, these type of ventifacts consist of a heavily fluted crust that is spalled off in places.  The thickness of the crust is about equal to the penetration depth of the flutes.  The entire surfaces of many of these rocks, including the exposed substrate where crust has spalled off, are covered with a much finer fluted texture.  This suggests a sequence PATHFINDER ROCK TEXTURES:  N.T. Bridges et al.  of 1) intense fluting, 2) formation of crust and spallation, and 3) minor fluting.  The large, outer flutes may have acted as repositories that trapped sand and dust.  Decomposition of feldspars in the sand and dust into clays, nucleation of water onto trapped grains, or other chemical reactions could have caused decomposition of the outer part of the rock, forming a crust.  Similar processes (probably without water) may have acted to form crusts at the Pathfinder site.      4) Moats within soil surrounding rocks in aeolian environment on Earth and Mars are common [1,6].  In the top picture above, a moat surrounds an ultramafic xenolith within basalt.  Over time, wind has eroded the softer basaltic matrix surrounding the xenolith.  A similar process may explain the putative conglomeritic texture seen on some rocks at the Pathfinder landing site [1,7,8], such as the rock Squash (bottom picture above) [3].  Conclusions      The brief overview of rock textures provided here illustrates the inherent difficult of deciphering origins of rocks based on remote sensing images.  We believe that many possible origins can be attributed to the rocks at the Pathfinder site, but that aeolian factors have been significant.  These observations should be considered when trying to understand the processes that have acted to shape and modify the MPF region. References: [1] R. Greeley et al., J. Geophys. Res., 104, 8573-8584, 1999. [2] A.W. Ward et al., J. Geophys. Res., 104, 8555-8571, 1999. [3] N.T. Bridges et al., J. Geophys. Res., 104, 8595-8615, 1999. [4] H.Y. McSween et al., J. Geophys. Res., 104, 8679-8715, 1999. [5] T.J. Parker et al., Lun. Planet. Sci. Conf. XXIX, 1829, 1998. [6] R. Greeley and J.D. Iversen, Wind as a Geological Process, 333 pp., Cambridge Univ. Press, New York, 1985. [7] Rover Team, Science, 278, 1765-1768, 1997. [8] H.J. Moore et al., J. Geophys. Res., 104, 8729-8746, 1999.    
