 BLUE MARS.  P. H. Smith 1, B. J. Bos 1, R. A. Yingst 1, and M. T. Lemmon 1, 1 Lunar and Planetary Lab, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ  85721; psmith@lpl.arizona.edu. Introduction:  The Pathfinder panoramic images of the landing site are familiar to all [1,2]; however, when the blue channel (440 nm) alone is displayed there is a marked change in the character of the rocks and soil.  Rocks shine brightly against a uniform dark background of soils, in contrast to darker rocks against brighter and darker soils as seen at redder wavelengths. This reversal is puzzling especially in the case of a rock like "flat top" which, true to its name, acts as a collector of falling dust.  Dust is known to cover all surfaces at the rate of 0.3 % per day [3]—one would expect that flat rocks would tend to have the same surface reflectivity as the nearby soil.  Redder images show this expected effect for the tops of dusty rocks, they tend to approach the local soil reflectivity. There are several reasons that the scene may appear different in blue light than at other wavelengths.  The obvious cause may be that the rocks are intrinsically nearly twice as reflective as the soil in the blue wavelengths and that dust is continuously being swept off of horizontal surfaces by winds, particularly dust devils.  Dust devils have been identified at the Pathfinder site both in IMP images of the horizon [4] and by their pressure drop signatures as they pass over the lander [5].  They seem to have the ability to lift tiny dust particles with an average size of 3 microns.  Surface winds with typical laminar flow across these surfaces are inefficient at lifting silt-sized particles. The same conclusion can be drawn from the true color images which are biased to red wavelengths. Why are two kinds of surface soil visible in the landing area when there is a steady rain of dust falling on the scene?  Clearly the fallen dust is regularly swept into drifts and underlying darker soils are exposed. Dust devils cannot be totally responsible since there are bright wind tails on the downwind sides of rocks and dark moats on the upwind side; these features align with the prevailing regional winds [6]. Based on the reflectivities of the rocks and soil, it is impossible to grind rocks into dust and reproduce the reflectance of the soil.  This is not surprising since the APXS instrument came to a similar conclusion based on the elemental analysis of both rock and soil samples. Mars Seen in Blue Light:  Figure 1 shows a single image of "flat top" and "half dome" in blue, true color, and enhanced color.  Note that the brighter rocks in the blue image are approximately twice as reflective as the soils.  There is a discernable difference between the two soil types in the blue image, but it is of low contrast. "Flat top" shows a progressive thinning of the overlying dust from the back of the rock towards the front.  The bright, blue nature of the rock is visible in the continuation of the brightness around the sharp edge of the rock.  Pebbles on the surface are easily identified in blue light because of the strong contrast. Yet historically, the blue filter has been thought of as lacking contrast on Martian surfaces.   Perhaps the high signal-to-noise ratio of the IMP camera (150: - 200:1) brings out features that were missed in Viking images. The blue images bring out subtle details that might be missed in the color images.  Notice the front face of "flat top."  Several barnacle-like structures are easily seen that might be missed in the color images. The BLUE MARS:  P. H. Smith et al. Figure 1.  From the top we have a blue image, a true color image, and a false color image taken by the IMP camera.  The rock in the top center is "half dome" and the one in the lower right is "flat top." same is true for "half dome" and the interesting plate-like structure that appears like elephant skin on the left side of the rock.  Is this a weathering rind, or perhaps the two other layers to the right suggest that the rock is layered throughout. Conclusions:   Careful inspection of images like Fig. 1 has shown that dust is being rapidly removed from the rocks and the surface.  The rocks are being swept on time scales of the order of weeks to months allowing us to see differences in the surface soils and rock reflectances even on the tops of the flat rocks.  Blue light shows strong contrast of a factor of 2 between rocks and soil.  This makes it an ideal filter for counting small rocks and distinguishing between pebbles and dirt clods. The spectral reflectance of the soils could not have been produced by grinding the local rocks. While dust devils, as frequently observed by Pathfinder, may be responsible for cleaning rock surfaces of fine dust, they cannot be alone responsible for shaping the scene.  Wind tails are aligned with the prevailing winds and do not seem to be randomly oriented as would be expected from dust devils.  Also, no changes in the surface have yet been observed in the Pathfinder images during the 83 sols of the mission. References: [1]  Smith, P. H. et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1758-1765. [2]  McSween Jr., H. Y. et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 8679-8715. [3] Rover Team. (1997) Science, 278, 1765-1768. [4]  Metzger, S. (1999) GRL, 26, 2781-2784.  [5]  Schofield, J. T. et al. (1997) Science, 278,  1752-1758.  [6]  Greeley, R. et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 8573-8584. 
