 Mars Orbiter Large-Scale Topographic Maps.  M. R. Rosiek, R. Kirk, and E. Howington-Kraus United States Geological Survey, Astrogeology Team, Flagstaff AZ 86001, (e-mail: mrosiek@usgs.gov).   Introduction: Work is underway to produce large-scale topographic maps of Mars from Viking Orbiter imagery. The maps will be based on the horizontal control from the revised Mars Digital Image Mosaic (MDIM) and vertical control will come from Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA). Photogrammetry and photoclinometry will be employed to derive digital elevation models (DEM). Background: Topographic information is essential to the understanding of many planetary surface processes. The MOLA is producing a global altimetry dataset with phenomenal absolute accuracy and excellent vertical and along-track (north-south) spatial resolution but a larger inter-track separation that limits the overall resolution of grid products. Photogrammetric mapping from medium- to highresolution images remains useful in the post-MOLA era, because it can produce much more finely gridded DEM. These models can now be tied to data from MOLA so that they partake of its absolute elevation accuracy. High resolution DEM produced in this way can be used to study various local geologic processes. With the loss of the Mars 96 mission, whose High Resolution Stereo Camera (HRSC) would have produced extremely high quality data for photogrammetry, the Viking Orbiter images will remain our best source for local topographic mapping in the near term, but two other image sets may become available later. First, the narrow-angle Mars Orbiter Camera (MOC NA) is now imaging Mars at 1.5m/pixel resolution. Because of the very small footprint of the NA images, repeat coverage from which a stereopair of two such images can be formed will be extremely rare. Overlap between a MOC NA image and high-resolution Viking images with usable stereo convergence will be much more common, and mapping with such mixed stereopairs may become important. Second, the HRSC has been proposed for reflight on the European Mars Express mission to be launched in 2003. Thus, HRSC images will not be available for several years at best. Both MOC and HRSC are pushbroom scanners, and an appropriate sensor model will need to be adapted or created before they can be used for stereomapping. Control: There has been a substantial improvement in geodetic control available for topographic mapping. Past topographic maps were either based on small, local control networks or tied to the USGS global three-dimensional control net [1]. A variety of problems subsequently were identified with this net, including an overall longitude difference of almost a quarter of a degree with respect to more recent and better accepted nets [2, 3], widespread horizontal errors (both random and patterned) of several kilometers, and vertical errors of as much as several kilometers. Over the past two years, however, we have participated in a joint effort by groups at USGS, RAND, JPL, Goddard, DLR, and elsewhere to produce a new generation of Mars global geodetic control net that is substantially improved in accuracy and that is widely supported by all relevant experts. As the first step of this project, which is funded by the Mars Data Analysis Program, we densified the RAND control network by adding images and point measurements from the global image mosaic of Mars (the well-known MDIM, distributed on six CD's in 1991), tripling the number of Viking images [4]. We also contributed substantially improved estimates of the image coordinates of all three U.S. Mars landers used in the net [5]. The RAND net is two-dimensional, that is, it uses near-vertical images and must have the elevations of control points specified as input. In the past year, the majority of control points were given elevations interpolated from MOLA data [6], and a new MDIM, based on the resulting control net, has been produced [7]. Thus, excellent data are available for both horizontal and vertical control of special-scale maps. Photogrammetry: The photogrammetric triangulation and DEM extraction will be carried out on a LH Systems DPW 790 digital photogrammetric workstation. We have augmented the SOCET Set software supplied with this system with ISIS/SOCET interface routines for importing and exporting planetary data. The quality of stereomapping depends on the resolution and geometry of images available and varies widely over Mars; understanding the availability of data is crucial to planning this task. A Viking Orbiter Image Database is available to help select images for topographic mapping [8]. This database contains a subset of geometric metadata from the most up-to-date records at the USGS, Flagstaff. We have written customized software to analyze and display selected aspects of these data. This provides an indication of the stereo quality for a given area and helps in selecting the images to use for topographic mapping. Photoclinometry: Photoclinometry (PC, or more descriptively, shape-from-shading) is another method that is used for producing high-resolution topographic data. Numerous approaches to PC have  Mars Orbiter Large-Scale Topographic Maps.  M. R. Rosiek, R. Kirk, and E. Howington-Kraus  been developed; we will use the method of Kirk [9], which constructs a full two-dimensional digital elevation model (DEM) from an image. In essence, a finite-element model of the surface shape is set up and iteratively adjusted until a shaded "image" calculated from it agrees with the real image, in a least-squares sense. Because PC directly determines slopes and then integrates slopes to get elevations, the accuracy of relative elevations between points varies with separation. PC provides excellent topographic detail at the single-pixel scale, which stereomatching cannot do, but is subject to increasing distortions over larger horizontal distances. One effective way to use PC is as a form of "smart interpolation", to add pixel-scale detail to a preexisting stereo dataset while retaining the absolute accuracy of the later. If the broad-scale distortions can be tolerated, PC can also produce useful topographic models where stereo coverage is nonexistent or extremely poor. References [1] Wu, S. S. C., and F. Schafer, 1984, Tech. Papers of the 50th Annual Meeting of the ASPRS, 2, 445-463.  [2] Davies, M. E., et al., 1992, Geodesy and Cartography, in Mars, Univ. of Ariz. Press, 321-342.  [3] Zeitler, W., and J. Oberst, 1999, The Mars Pathfinder Landing Site and the Viking Control Point Network, J. Geophys. Res., in press. [4] Kirk, R. L., et al., 1999, Mars DIM: The Next Generation (abstract #1849), Lunar Planet. Sci., XXX, CD-ROM. [5] Parker, T. J., R. L. Kirk, and M. E. Davies, 1999, Location and Geologic Setting for the Viking 1 Lander (abstract #2040), Lunar Planet. Sci., XXX, CD-ROM. [6] Davies, M. E., et al., 1999, EOS Trans AGU, Supplement ( v. 80), #46, 11/16/99. [7] Kirk, R.L., E.M. Lee, R.M. Sucharski, J. Richie, A. Grecu, and S.K. Castro, 2000. MDIM 2.0: A revised global digital image mosaic of Mars. Lunar Planet. Sci., XXXI, Abstract 2011, Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston (CD-ROM). [8] Kirk, R. L., J. M. Barrett, and E. Howington-Kraus, 1999, A Database of Viking Orbiter Image Coverage for Cartographic and Scientific Use (abstract #1857), Lunar Planet. Sci., XXX, CD-ROM. [9] Kirk, R. L., 1987, III. A Fast Finite-Element Algorithm for Two-Dimensional Photoclinometry, Ph.D. Thesis (unpubl.), Caltech, 165-258. 
