 SPECTRAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SHAPE CLASSES OF ROCKS AT THE MARS PATHFINDER LANDING SITE. Scott Murchie1, Olivier Barnouin-Jha1, Jeffrey Johnson2, James F. Bell III3, and Richard Morris4 (1Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD; 2USGS, Flagstaff, AZ; 3Cornell University, Ithaca, NY; 4NASA-Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX.) Abstract - Dust-coated rocks at the Mars Pathfinder landing site commonly exhibit a strong inflection in their spectra at 600 nm that has been attributed previously to a crystalline ferric phase, combined with the adhering dust to form desert varnish-like coatings. The strength of the 600-nm inflection varies systematically between different shape classes of rocks. This variation may originate from differences in rocks' exposure age and their development of coatings, or it may reflect differences in the rocks' primary lithologies. Introduction: Coatings on rocks at the Mars Pathfinder landing site form two groups based on spectral properties: "primary trend coatings" with a reflectance peak at 750 nm and lacking a 900-nm ferric absorption band, and "secondary trend coatings" with an 800-nm peak and a 900-nm band several percent deep. Primary-trend coatings account for >95% of reddened rock surfaces [1]. Comparison of rocks' elemental abundances with their 670-nm/440-nm reflectance ratios shows that redder rocks have a more dust-like composition, consistent with reddening by adhering dust [1]. Earlier analysis of the 12-color "SuperPan" panorama [2] showed that primary-trend coatings also exhibit a strong inflection in their spectra at 600 nm (Fig. 1). This inflection is nearly absent from both uncoated rock and dust, and is a distinguishing feature of coated rock surfaces (Figs. 2 and 3). The 600-nm inflection is characteristic of several ferric minerals that form in the presence of water [3], suggesting growth of a phase that cemented adhering dust into desert varnish-like coatings [2]. Investigation: There are strong suggestions of differences in spectral properties between rocks having different shapes (Figs. 2 and 3): tabular rocks appear to exhibit strong 600-nm shoulders, whereas many small rocks appear to have weak shoulders. To quantify the relationship between spectral properties and shape, rocks were divided into shape classes relevant to lithology: "flat" rocks having planar surfaces nearly level with soil; "tabular" rocks with planar upper surfaces; "subtabular" rocks with at least one planar surface; "equant" rocks; "angular" rocks; "lobate" rocks with rounded protuberances, interpreted by some investigators as conglomerates [4]; "socketed" rocks with depressions similar in size to the lobate protuberances, commonly also exhibiting lobate protuberances, and also interpreted by some as conglomerates [4]; and "pebbles". Parameterized properties of pixels falling on rocks of each shape class were extracted. The number of pixels in each shape class was normalized and, to minimize edge effects of misregistration between spectral channels, the upper and lower 2.5% of data for each class were neglected. Spectral Variations Between Rock Shape Classes: Overall, the abundance distribution of rock surfaces with different 600-nm shoulder strengths is nearly Gaussian. Equant and subtabular rocks most closely approach average properties. There is considerable overlap between shape classes, but lobate and socketed rocks (putative conglomerates) and pebbles are biased toward lesser 600-nm shoulder strengths. Conversely, tabular rocks are biased toward greater 600-nm shoulder strengths (Figs. 4 and 5). The tabular rocks' upper surfaces are closely similar both in their spectral properties and in their textures to flat rocks, suggesting that flat rocks may be upper surfaces of partially buried tabular rocks. At the class level, tabular and flat rocks are moderately distinct from lobate and socketed rocks and pebbles. These results substantiate the impression that different shape classes of rocks exhibit differing development of coatings. Possible Origins of Differences in Coating Abundances: The null hypothesis to explain this result is that it is an illumination effect; this is inconsistent with many rocks having uniform 600nm shoulder strengths on differently-oriented facets. Alternatively, upper surfaces of rocks may preferentially accumulate dust, leading to different coverages by coatings on rocks of different shape. This is inconsistent with the lack of coatings on upper surfaces of lobate and socketed rocks, and their presence on the near-vertical sides of tabular rocks (Fig. 3). Another possibility is that spectral differences between classes arise because of differences in exposure age, with lesser development of coatings on relatively recently exposed rocks. Observed superposition relations are consistent with a lesser exposure age for rocks having weaker 600-nm shoulders (Fig. 6). However, because no elemental abundance measurements were obtained for some shape classes including tabular rocks [1], we also cannot exclude that spectral differences between classes arises in part from primary lithologic differences. References: [1] H. McSween et al., J. Geophys. Res. 104, 8679, 1999. [2] O. Barnouin-Jha et al., Lunar Planet. Sci. XXXI, , 2000. [3] R. Morris et al., J. Geophys. Res. 105, 1757, 2000. [4] H. Moore et al., J. Geophys. Res. 104, 8729, 1999. [5] J. Bell et al., J. Geophys. Res. 105, 1721, 2000.  Fig. 1. Definition of the 600-nm shoulder, BD600 of [5]. Fig. 2. 440-530-670-nm 3-color composite image of the "Rock Garden." Fig. 3. False-color image of strength of the 600-nm shoulder. Redder colors represent a stronger shoulder. Fig. 4. Relative abundances of rock shapes having different 600-nm shoulder strengths. Fig. 6 (above). Example superposition relations between rocks with different 600-nm shoulder strengths. Arrows indicate rocks with weaker shoulders superposed on rocks with stronger shoulders. False color is as in Fig. 3. Fig. 5 (left). Mean and standard deviation of 600-nm shoulder strength for each rock shape class. 
