 ACID SULFATE ALTERATION OF BASALTIC ANDESITES: A CASE STUDY NEAR RENO, NEVADA. W. M. Calvin, R. G. Vaughan, J. Taranik and A. Smailbegovic Arthur Brant Laboratory for Exploration Geophysics Geological Sciences, MS 172, University of Nevada, Reno NV 89557 (wcalvin@mines.unr.edu; http://mines.unr.edu/able)   Background:  Mars Alteration Mars has long been associated with a  basaltic composition.  This stems from a number of lines of evidence from the identification of pyroxene bands in the reflectance spectra [e.g. 1], the basaltic composition of the SNC meteorites [e.g. 2], bulk density and interior models [3], and volcanic morphologies consistent with mafic to ultramafic source magmas [4].  There has been an equally long history in understanding various alteration and weathering scenarios for these source materials.  Given the high abundance of sulfur in the soils weathering models have concentrated on acid sulfate style weathering [e.g. 5,6] or palagonitization, a low temperature alteration process occurring among basalts [e.g. 7].    However, both the Pathfinder APXS analysis of bulk rocks and the TES compositional information suggest that some part of the surface may in fact be dominated by andesitic volcanics [e.g. 8,9]. As noted by Morris et al. [10] (among others) the soil properties at the Pathfinder site can not be directly derived by chemical alteration of the rocks at the site or from SNC meteorites along any of the well-studied basaltic alteration models.  While much work has been performed to understand the alteration of basalt with application to Mars,  little work has been done on andesitic alteration via acid sulfate weathering.  Understanding these alteration processes have direct relevance to the weathering of the Martian northern lowlands.  The area surrounding Reno, NV typifies both ancient and presently active  hydrothermal region with acid sulfate weathering and leaching on top of andesitic volcanics and offers an ideal field locality for exploring  this kind of alteration and its possible application to Mars.   Case Region: Geiger Grade / Virginia City The Virginia Range located southeast of Reno, NV, consists predominantly of Miocene volcanic rocks that overlie Mesozoic metasedimentary, metavolcanic, and granitic rocks.  The Kate Peak and Alta formations, which outcrop along Geiger Grade (State Route 341) are predominantly andesite and dacite volcanic flows.  The region has experienced extensive hydrothermal alteration and is directly adjacent to the presently active Steamboat Springs geothermal region.   Past hydrothermal activity has been responsible for the concentration of economic minerals and the region has been well studied for its association with the famous Comstock Lode district, a source of gold, silver and mercury since the 1850's. The region offers the opportunity to explore an active hydrothermal zone characterized by fluctuating ground water, amorphous siliceous sinter, and acid sulfate alteration of andesitic volcanic rocks.   Previous studies have noted extensive surface alteration which has been described as argillic (predominated by clays), propylitic (conversion to chlorite, calcite and epidote) and "bleaching".  Bleaching is a field term  used to describe acid sulfate weathering.  This occurs when sulfuric acid is formed from widely disseminated pyrite interacting with rainfall or ground water or by effusion of H2S gas from active hot spring vents in the region.  Numerous prior studies have identified the wide spread zones of alteration but have been limited in the spatial detail of surface mapping [e.g. 11,12].  The area around the Steamboat Springs geothermal field is characterized by abundant siliceous sinter terraces with a wide range of ages and compaction.  Hyperspectral Data Sets: A number of hyperspectral and multi-spectral airborne data sets over the region have been acquired, including both high and low-altitude AVIRIS, SEBASS, TIMS and MASTER.    AVIRIS- This visible and near-infrared system measures 224 spectral channels from 0.4 to 2.5 μm.  Spatial resolutions are 20m for high altitude flights and 2 to 4 m for low altitude flights.  The data sets are useful for classification of clays, sulfates, iron oxides and other surface alteration products, however some nonuniqueness is introduced where clay and sulfate absorptions overlap.  SEBASS- This short wave and thermal infrared instrument measures 128 spectral channels from 7.8 to 13.5 μm. Spatial resolution is 2m but the swath is limited to 0.25km.  The data can characterize primary silicates as well as alteration products.  The instru Sulfate Alteration Near Reno, NV: A Mars Analog Process:  Calvin, Vaughan, Taranik and Smailbegovic  ment a temperature sensitivity (NEΔT) of 0.05 K resulting in signal-to-noise values near 2000:1.    TIMS- This is a 6 channel thermal sensor with a ground spatial resolution of 10m.  Though limited in spectral fidelity, the most common analysis technique, a decorrelation stretch, can distinguish clay alteration from unaltered silicates, predominantly quartz.  MASTER- Recently, in support of instruments on the Terra spacecraft, an airborne simulator MASTER has been developed.  MASTER acquires data in 25 channels from 0.45 to 2.4 μm and 10 channels from 7.75 and 12.85μm.  As both VIS/NIR and TIR channels are acquired simultaneously the instrument provides an ideal link between hyperspectral data sets such as AVIRIS and SEBASS.  Field verification with the μ-FTIR spectrometer.  Preliminary Analysis:  Initial work has focused on calibration and validation of the SEBASS data using both a field and laboratory approach as well as algorithms provided by Aerospace Corp (owner and operator of the instrument).  Simple multi-band methods such as decorrelation stretch and intensity-hue-saturation transforms can immediately separate quartz, feldspars, and clays. In the color composite below quartz dominant regions are bright yellow, clays are pink and feldspars are brown.   These priniciple components have also been verified with XRD analysis of field samples.  We will present preliminary maps of the dominant mineral components and spectral separation of the clay, quartz, and sulfate signatures.    References: [1] Mustard et al., J. Geophys. Res. 102, p. 25605, 1997.  [2] McSween, Meteoritics, 29, p. 757, 1994.  [3] McGetchin and Smyth, Icarus, 34, p. 512, 1978. [4] Mouginis-Mark et al., in Mars, Kieffer et al., Eds., p. 424, 1992. [5] Banin et al., J. Geophys. Res., 102, p. 13341, 1997.  [6] Burns and Fisher, J. Geophys. Res., 95, p. 14415, 1990. [7] Morris, et al., Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 57, p. 4597, 1993.  [8] McSween, et al., J. Geophys. Res., 104, p. 8679, 1999. [9] Bandfield, et al., Science, 287, p. 1626, 2000. [10] Morris, et al., J. Geophys. Res., 105, p. 1757, 2000.  [11] Thompson and White, USGS Professional Paper 458A, 1964. [12]Hudson, D.M., Ph.D. Dissertation University of Nevada, Reno,  1983.      Decorrelation stretch of the SEBASS image acquired over the Steamboat Springs / Geiger Grade region.  High quartz or siliceous sinter is bright yellow, clay dominant alteration is pink and regions with pronounced feldspars are brown to dark orange.   	Background:  Mars Alteration	Case Region: Geiger Grade / Virginia City
