 N-DIMENSIONAL VISUALIZATION AND SPECTRAL MIXTURE ANALYSIS APPLIED TO IMAGER FOR MARS PATHFINDER DATA: DETECTION AND MAPPING OF ROCKS AND SOILS.  W.H. Farrand1 , J.R. Johnson2 and J.F. Bell III3, and, 1Space Science Institute, 3100 Marine St, Suite A353, Boulder, CO 80303, farrand@colorado.edu, 2U.S. Geological Survey, Flagstaff, AZ., 3Cornell University, Department of Astronomy, Ithaca NY. Introduction:  We report on early results from a new spectral analysis of the Imager for Mars Pathfinder (IMP) Super Pan multispectral image data of rocks and soils at the Mars Pathfinder (MPF) landing site.  Our approach makes use of sub-pixel analysis algorithms that were originally developed for use with terrestrial airborne imaging spectrometer data.  This investigation is timely in light of recent work suggesting the presence of a greater variety of rock and soil types at the MPF landing site [1,2,3] than previously surmised. Data.  The Super Pan dataset was acquired using all 13 IMP bands (440-1000 nm) to cover most of the MPF landing site [4].  Version 3 of the IMP calibration algorithm (now implemented in ISIS) was used to calibrate the images to relative reflectance [5]. ISIS was also used to spatially register left- and right-eye image cubes.  The USGS geometric control network of the landing site was used with ISIS algorithms to simultaneously mosaic and project the eight separate image sequences ("octants" labeled S0181-S0188) that comprise the Super Pan.  Within a given octant, residual artifacts such as subtle mosaic seams and photometric differences resulting from variability in image acquisition times may be enhanced by mathematical processing.  In order to mitigate these effects, individual regions of a mosaic (referred to as "segments") were examined here. Techniques.  The segments studied here were subjected to a variant of principal component analysis, the Minimum Noise Fraction (MNF) transform [6].  The MNF concentrates signal into the first several channels and noise to the latter channels.  The first three to four MNF bands were examined in three to four dimensional space through the use of a n-dimensional visualization tool in the commercial ENVI software package [7].  Figure 1 shows one representation of data from the first three MNF bands of a given segment.  The triangular shape of the data cloud indicates an intrinsic dimensionality [8] of two in the data.  Endmembers determined by the n-dimensional visualization approach generally consisted of shade, bright dust, and rock.  These three endmembers were used in an implementation of spectral mixture analysis (SMA) similar to that described in [8].  Alternatively, some endmembers or anomalous materials were mapped using the foreground/background analysis (FBA) technique [9]. Results: Figure 2 shows a fraction image of the "rock" endmember from a segment of the S0182 octant.  Besides the obvious high fractional DN values of the rocks themselves, there are patches of soil with high "rock" fractions surrounding some rocks. Significantly, these patches are distinct from broader occurences of the previously identified "dark" soil class [3].  The "rock" endmember and this proposed new "rock soil" class are also distinct from the "disturbed soil" class (also noted in [3]). Physically, "rock soil" could represent bright soil with locallyenhanced abundances of pebbles or rock fragments, possibly originating from physical or chemical spallation of adjacent rocks. Or, this unit could represent lag deposits of coarser-grained soils and pebbles in localized regions of particularly enhanced aeolian transport of fines. Recent work has suggested the presence of as many as three distinct rock types at the MPF landing site [1,2].  The predominant "gray" rock lithology was the only type sampled by the APXS on the Sojourner rover and is believed to correspond to a composition of basaltic andesite [10].  The two recently recognized classes include "black" rock, which has a broad absorption centered near 930 nm and "orange" rock, which has a strong absorption centered near 900 nm.  SMA of the segments in the S0184 octant revealed several new examples of the black rock class as spectrally distinct features, not well modelled by other endmember spectra (Figure 3).  SMA also revealed rocks with isolated pixels of the model black rock spectrum (variably weathered surfaces?) and variants of the model black rock spectrum (Figure 4). Conclusions.  The ongoing analysis of IMP data continues to reveal new and subtle variations in spectral features that may be related to distinct variations in rock and soil types at the MPF site. Specifically, we find evidence to confirm the existence of additional rock types in newly calibrated and rectified IMP data, and we propose the existence of a new soil type that may indicate evidence of localized physical and/or chemical weathering processes, although alternative possibilities cannot be discounted. The approaches described here provide  SPECTRAL MIXTURE ANALYSIS OF IMP DATA:  W. H. Farramd et al. additional means of detecting, mapping and analysing these potentially different lithologies.  Additional work is required to confirm these results, including photometric corrections for the effects of diffuse reddened skylight on spectra of inclined rock surfaces [e.g, 11]. Acknowledgements.  This research is funded by NASA OSS MDAP grant # NAG5-9774. REFERENCES:  [1] Murchie S. et al. (2000) LPS XXXI [2] Murchie S. et al. (2001) submitted manuscript, Icarus. [3] Bell J. F. III et al. (2000) JGR, 105, 1344. [4] Golombek, M., et al., JGR, 104, 8523, 1999, [5] Reid, R. et al., JGR, 104, 8907, 1999, [6] Green A. et al. (1988) TGARS, 26, 65 , [7] RSI (2000) ENVI 3.4 User's Guide. [8] Adams, J. et al. (1986) JGR, 91, 8098. [9] Smith M. et al., Proc. IGARSS '94, [10] McSween et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 8679, [11] Thomas et al., JGR, 8795, 1999. Fig. 4. IMP spectra of black rock types.  Red spectrum is "standard" black rock (the spectrum of the circled black rock of Fig. 3) and the blue is a variant of the model black rock spectrum.  This variant has been observed as discrete small rocks in octant S0184 in SMA RMS error images. Fig. 2. "Rock" fraction image for a segment of octant S0182.  The red ellipse surrounds highest fractions of "rock soil".  The yellow ellipse surrounds a patch with relatively high fractions of "rock soil". The green circle surrounds a patch of standard dark soil. Fig. 1. Data cloud of first three MNF bands of a segment from octant 184.  Orange pixels define a "bright dust" endmember, yellow- the "shade" endmember, and green the "rock" endmember. Fig. 3. RMS error image from spectral mixture analysis of subset from octant 184.  Bright patch that is circled is a spectrally anomalous fresh black rock near Flat Top rock. 
