 COLOR RATIOS OF THE APXS ANALYZED ROCKS AT THE MARS PATHFINDER LANDING SITE. A.T. Basilevsky1,2, N. Thomas2, S. F. Hviid2, H. U. Keller2, 1Vernadsky Institute of Geochemistry and Analytical Chemistry, 117975, Moscow, Russia, abas@geokhi.ru. 2Max-Planck Institut fuer Aeronomie, Katlenburg-Lindau, D37191 Germany. Introduction: This work studies the relations between the rocks and eolian dust on the example of eight rocks analyzed by APXS and their nearest vicinities. Emphasis of this study is analysis of color ratios of the APXS analyzed rocks using fragments of Gallery and Super panoramas. The morphologies of these rocks were described in detail by [1, 2]. Based on the results of [6] we use the observed reddeness of the rocks as a measure of pollution of their surfaces with the dust coating. We apply this approach to our study through a comparison of the considered objects with the red drift deposit of the Barnacle Bill wind tail. The latter is considered as a typical feature for the red fine-grained eolian deposit [3]. So we suggest to use as the measure of reddeness the parameter D: Dx y I nm x y R nm I nm x y R nm I nm x y R nm ,( ) , ( ) ( ) , ( ) ( ) , ( ) =− 440 440 670 670 670 670 where I nm x y( ) ,440 is a brightness of pixel x,y at 440 nm channel, R nm( )440  is a brightness of the reference spot (wind tail behind Barnacle Bill) at 440 nm channel, I nm x y( ) ,670 is a brightness of pixel x,y at 670 nm channel, R nm( )670  is a brightness of the reference spot at 670 nm channel. So for places which have ratio of brightnesses in 440 and 670 nm the same as the Barnacle Bill wind tail has, the parameter D = 0. Those, which have this ratio being larger than the reference spot (they are bluer than the reference spot), have the parameter D>0. Those, which have this ratio being smaller than the reference spot (they are redder), have the parameter D<0. Using this technique for the analysis of distribution of dust on the Pathfinder SSI images is not straightforward however. On the surface of Mars there are three major sources of illumination: 1) direct Sun light, 2) Sun light scattered in the atmosphere, and 3) Sun light reflected from the surface. The last two sources are rather red [5, 8]. This is why places, which are shadowed from the direct Sun light, look on the Dimages as having D close to zero or even smaller than zero although the true color of these places may be not red at all. In our analysis we take this in mind. Results and discussion: Observations in eight study sites and joint analysis of the observed distribution of the parameter D and rock morphologies, show that each rock is colored very heterogeneously, in the form of numerous centimeter-sized spots (Figure 1). Distribution of these spots correlates with microrelief of the rock surfaces. Higher D values (bluer spots) tend to correspond to positive features (knobs, edges) while lower D values (redder spots) correspond to pits. This indicates on deficit of dust on positive features and on accumulation of dust in pits. Although some of the spots are rather red, rocks on average are obviously less red then soils that agrees with earlier observations of [6]. When we see upwind and downwind parts of the rock (Barnacle Bill, Yogi) the first are on average less red than the latter. This is also in agreement with observations of [6]. Based on the fact that some rocks, which have prominently pitted surfaces, show a prismatic shape obviously controlled by the rock jointing (e.g. Wedge, Shark, Chimp), it was concluded [2] that pits (at least most of them) are not gas bubbles in lavas, but have been resulted from the surface abrasion. Observations of these authors on terrestrial volcanics showed that if the pits would be gas bubbles, the observed high concentration of them should prevent spallation of the rocks along so regular planes. Similarly pitted rocks are observed, for example, in the Western Desert of Egypt where the pits formed due to sand abrasion. Formation of pits in this process implies cleaning the pits due to removal of the destroying rock material from the cavities. Observed accumulation of dust in the pits of the Pathfinder rocks seems to evidence that the pit formation is not the ongoing process but occurred some time earlier at different surface environment. This may correlate with observations of [4] implying change in wind regime at the site. All APXS-analyzed areas on the Pathfinder rocks have spots with rather low values of the parameter D. Comparison of values of the parameter D for the APXS-analyzed areas with the red/blue ratios for these areas, determined by [6], and with contents of SO3, determined by Rieder et al. [7] shows reasonably good correlation among them. This means that parameter D is indeed the indicator of degree of contamination of rocks with the dust. Our observations confirm the conclusion of [6]) that none of the analyses had been done on completely dust-free surface of the rock. The degree  COLOR RATIOS OF THE MARS PATHFINDER ROCKS:  A. T. Basilevsky et al. of contamination with dust is evidently the smallest for analysis of Shark, and the largest for Yogi. The APXS analysis area, which is about 5 cm in diameter [7], is too large to fit any of the observed dustfree (D > 1.2) areas on all studied rocks. The exception is rock Wedge, one facet of which (unfortunately not APXS analyzed) shows rather large high-D area. This means that in future missions, instruments for analysis of rocks should have either much smaller deployable head with high accuracy control of its position, or a tool to clean the surface under analysis. Flat, close to horizontal top surfaces of some rocks (Barnacle Bill, Flat Top, Chimp) have very low values of parameter D. They are obviously covered with dust coating. Except this, no vertical trend in distribution of the parameter D on the rocks has been observed. On rock facets close to vertical and inclined in respect to horizon, no top-bottom trend in dust coating distribution is observed. The exception is ~5 cm wide brighter band at the base of Stimpy and some neighboring rocks interpreted by [3] as a remnant of a former, now deflated soil horizon. Soils are significantly redder than rocks. Among soils the cloddy varieties are slightly less red than the drifts. These cloddy soil areas are typically in close vicinities of rocks. They are evidently the result of deflation of fine dust component of the soil by air turbulence. The dust deficit is probably a reason that they are slightly less red than the drifts consisting essentially of dust. Images of the parameter D distribution show numerous cases of the effect of sky shadowing. It is obvious on these image both for soils and small rocks at the foot of tall steep-sloped rocks. On normal color images this effect is not apparent and may be overlooked. In future studies involving selection of places for chemical and other analyses of this sort on Mars surface, this effect should be taken into account. Conclusions: Imaging of parameter D revealed details in the distribution of dust coatings on the rocks which have implications on the eolian processes at the Mars Pathfinder landing site. References: [1] Basilevsky A. T. et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 8617-8636. [2] Basilevsky A. T. et al. (1999) Solar System Res., 33, 170-186. [3] Greeley R. et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 8573-8584. [4] Greeley R. et al. (2000) JGR, 105, 1829-1840. [5] Markiewicz W. et al. (1999), JGR, 104, 9009-9017. [6] McSween H. Y. et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 8679-8715. [7] Rieder R. et al. (1997) , Science, 278, 1771-1774. [8] Thomas N. et al. (2000) JGR, 105, 26.739-26,744.. Figure 1. Barnacle Bill, 20 cm high and 45 cm wide rock sitting about 2.5 m from the lander center. A) Color image of the rock, fragment of Gallery panorama; B) D-image of the rock; C) Color stereo image of the rock produced by Tim Parker (to see 3D use the red/blue glasses). 
