 A SURVEY OF THE LUMINESCENCE DOSE RESPONSE OF A VARIETY OF TERRESTRIAL BASALTS AND ANDESITES AS ANALOGS OF MARS SURFACE MATERIALS.  N. Abbott1, K. Lepper2 and S.W.S. McKeever2.  1School of Geology, 105 Noble Research Center; 2Department of Physics, 145 Physical Sciences Bldg. (Lepper@okstate.edu); Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK  74078-3072. Introduction:  At several recent conferences and workshops [1-3] absolute age dating has been identified as a critical technology needed for future Mars missions.  Techniques specifically targeted for sediment dating are needed to provide a temporal framework for the climatic process recorded in surface features and deposits on Mars, particularly in the polar regions.  Lepper and McKeever [4,5] have proposed development of luminescence dating as a remote insitu technique for absolute dating of sediment grains. Clifford et al. [6] have also noted that luminescence dating appears to be more practical from cost, engineering, and logistical perspectives than other isotopebased methods proposed for in-situ dating on Mars. We report here the results of ongoing experiments with terrestrial analogs of martian surface materials to establish a broad fundamental knowledge base from which robust dating procedures for robotic missions may be developed.  Such data will be critical for determining the engineering requirements of remote insitu luminescence dating equipment intended for use on Mars. General principles of luminescence dating: Over geologic time, ionizing radiation from the decay of naturally occurring radioisotopes and from cosmic rays liberates charge carriers (electrons and holes) within silicate mineral grains. The charge carriers can subsequently become localized at crystal defects leading to accumulation of a "trapped" electron population. Recombination of the charge carriers results in photon emission, i.e. luminescence.  The intensity of luminescence produced is proportional to the number of trapped charges, and thereby to the radiation dose absorbed by the mineral grains since deposition at the sampled site.  A determination of the ionizing radiation dose rate at the sample location allows the age of the deposit to be determined (from Age = Absorbed Dose / Dose Rate).  Experimentally, thermal or optical stimulation can be employed to liberate trapped charge and thus produce thermoluminescence (TL) or optically stimulated luminescence (OSL), respectively. The event dated by OSL or TL techniques is actually the last exposure of the sediment grains to sunlight (i.e. a luminescence age is a depositional age). This is the case because solar radiation, particularly UV radiation, optically stimulates and removes trapped charge accumulated prior to burial and resets the luminescence clock.  Because a luminescence date is a depositional age, the technique is uniquely suited to address questions of chronostratigraphy and climate evolution recorded in sedimentary deposits on Mars.  Recent experimental and analytical advances [7-10] have made it possible to perform fundamental luminescence measurements on less than 1 mg of sediment.  The success of these advances paves the way for the automation and miniaturization that will be required for robotic dating experiments on Mars. Previous investigations based on the Mars soil simulant JSC Mars-1:  We have previously reported our characterization of the fundamental luminescence properties of the JSC Mars-1 soil simulant [5].  The results indicated that the   bulk    sample   has a wide dynamic radiation dose response range, with no unusual or prohibitive signal instabilities, and is susceptible to solar resetting.  These three properties form a stable base for future investigations with the goal of developing a robust set of experimental procedures for in-situ luminescence dating. However, objections to JSC Mars-1 as a simulant have been raised [11].  One objection is that the grain size distribution of eolian surface sediments on Mars, as inferred from Viking Lander data and Pathfinder airborne particulate data, is dominated by grains that are less than 10 microns in diameter (fine silt and clay fractions) [11].  The dominant grain size fraction in JSC Mars-1 is, however, medium sand (250-450 microns) [12].  Another primary objection to JSC Mars-1 is based on differences in composition [11].  From available geochemical data for martian soils, JSC Mars-1 appears to be deficient in sulfur and chlorine and enhanced in plagioclase feldspar [13]. It is improbable that a singular terrestrial sample could adequately represent the distribution of sedimentary material types that will be encountered over the entire surface of Mars.  To examine if an in-situ luminescence dating method can be broadly applicable, its performance on a wide range of analogous materials needs to be cataloged. Survey of other Mars sediment simulants:  In order to address objections to the JCS Mars-1 simulant and to establish a broad materials knowledge base for eventual in-situ luminescence dating experiments, we have examined the TL signal response and the infrared optically stimulated luminescence (IR-OSL) signal response to applied radiation dose for several terrestrial rock samples.  The selected samples range in composition from ultramafic to intermediate and include one  olivine, JSC Mars-1, three basalts, and two andesites. Rocks from these general compositional classes are anticipated to be the source to martian sediments. We evaluated the TL and IR-OSL response to absorbed dose, for at least 4 grain-size fractions prepared from each sample: clay (<4 microns), fine silt (4-15 microns), silt (15-63 microns) and very fine sand (63-125 microns).  However, more grain-size subsets were isolated and measured for JSC Mars-1.  The luminescence signal was measure in the UV emission range for both stimulation techniques used (TL and IR-OSL). Results/Discussion.  Measured TL signal intensities varied widely -- the andesites and two of the basalt samples exhibited strong TL signals, while the olivine, JSC Mars-1 and one basalt sample had relatively weak TL signal intensities.  TL signals discernable from the background level were measurable from all samples and most grain-size fractions excepting the olivine sample.  In the later case only the largest dose given to the largest grains yielded signals above the background level.  The minimum discernable dose varied somewhat, but was generally 1 Gy (which was the minimum dose administered in this set of tests). The dose response for all samples and grain-size fractions (having signals discernable from background) was linear and none of the samples reached the saturation condition even at the highest administered dose of 1000 Gy.  In the martian near surface environment (<1 m depth), where dose rates of ~0.1 Gy/yr are anticipated, the linear dose response range measured for most of the samples (~10-1000 Gy) would correspond to an age range of 102 to 104 years.  However, samples buried deeply and rapidly (>1 m depth) would be irradiated at a much lower rate (5 mGy/yr or less).  In this lower dose rate environment the corresponding age range would be 103 to perhaps 106 years. TL data curves -- plots of luminescence intensity versus temperature (refer to [5] for detailed discussion of experimental and analytical procedures) -- measured for the olivine and basalt samples share some characteristics with JSC Mars-1.  The shared characteristics include a broad "primary" peak centered around 200˚C and a more well defined peak at approximately 110˚C. However, one of the basalt samples appears to exhibit an additional peak at 375˚C.  Among the basalts, an additional peak centered between 125˚C and 150˚C can be discerned in the samples with higher signal intensities.  The andesite samples exhibit a primary peak centered between 325-350˚C and a 110˚C peak.  In at least one of the andesite samples additional peaks are indicated at 150˚C and 250˚C. Measured IR-OSL signal intensities in this set of experiments were generally weak with the exception of one basalt sample.  However, as we have demonstrated in the earlier work with JSC Mars-1 [5], low signal levels are not in themselves prohibitive to dating measurements.  From the currently available analysis it appears that the IR-OSL dose response is linear across the full range of administered doses from ~1 Gy to ~1000 Gy.  This is in agreement with the TL dose response data reported above and with our earlier IROSL findings for JSC Mars-1.  However, as with the TL results, the minimum discernable dose may vary. Additional analysis of the IR-OSL data is required and will be reported in the presentation. Summary:  This survey documents that, with the possible exception of purely ultramafic compositions (olivine), terrestrial rocks with compositions similar to those evaluated here (mafic and intermediate) exhibit TL and IR-OSL signals measurable by laboratory luminescence dating equipment.  Rocks of these compositions are anticipated to be the source to martian sediments.  The dose responses of the materials measured in this survey indicate behavior appropriate for dating applications.  However, as we have previously discussed [5], dose response is only one of three fundamental properties that a material must posses to be suitable for luminescence dating.  The stability of the signals observed in this survey as well as the susceptibility of the materials to solar resetting will be evaluated and reported in future work. Luminescence dating is uniquely suited to assist in the task of deciphering the depositional history, chronostratigraphy, and climate evolution recorded in martian surface deposits, including polar deposits.  In this presentation we report the results of ongoing experiments with terrestrial analogs of martian surface materials to establish a broad fundamental knowledge base from which robust dating procedures for robotic missions may be developed.  These data will also be critical in determining the engineering requirements of remote in-situ luminescence dating equipment intended for use on Mars. References:  [1] First International Conference on Mars Polar Science and Exploration (1998) Navosta TX. [2] Mars Geochronology Workshop (2000) Chicago, IL. [3] Concepts and Approaches for Mars Exploration (2000) Houston, TX. [4] Lepper K. and McKeever S.W.S. (1998) LPI Contibution No. 953. [5] Lepper K. and McKeever S.W.S. (2000) Icarus. 144, 295-301. [6] Clifford S.M. et al. (2000) Icarus, 144, 210-242. [7] Bøtter-Jensen L. and Duller G. (1992) Nucl. Tracks and Radiat. Meas, 20(4), 549553. [8] Duller G. (1994) Quat. Sci. Rev, 13, 149 156. [9] Duller G. (1995) Radiat. Meas, 24(3): 217-226. [10] Lepper K. et al. (in review) Radiat. Meas. [11] Hargraves R.B. et al., with reply by Allen (1999) EOS, 80(15), 168-169 [12] Allen C. et al. (1998) EOS, 79(34), 404. [13] Morris R. Pers. comm 
