 GORGONUM CHAOS: ARE THE SEEPAGE-RUNOFF FEATURES REALLY RECENT?  G. Leone1, L. Wilson1, V. Orofino2, and S. Fonti2, 1Environmental Science Dept., Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YQ, U.K. (e-mail:    g.leone@lancaster.ac.uk   ), 2Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Lecce, via Arnesano C.P. 193, 73100 Lecce, Italy. Introduction:  MGS - MOC images of Gorgonum Chaos [1] show numerous examples of Martian gullies that all start or head in a specific layer roughly a hundred meters beneath the surface of Mars. These features are located on the south-facing wall of a trough in the Gorgonum Chaos region, an area found to have many examples of gullies proposed to have formed by seepage and runoff of liquid water in recent Martian times [1]. Although the dark tone of the alcoves and channels in the images published so far is not likely to be the result of wet ground, some authors suggest that water has seeped out of the ground and moved down the slope quite recently (order of a few to tens of years, even today) [1] [2]. Image analysis:  A thorough analysis of the MOC images coupled with a few simple climatic considerations suggest that these gullies are not so young. The gullies are not deeply incised and many of them are even filled up with detritus or dust-covered as can be seen in the upper part of Fig. 1 thus showing that the generating process acted only intermittently and was limited in time because no aquifer recharge has been available after their first formation. The gullies start immediately under the layer of the overlying harder rock indicating that the potentiometric level of the aquifer must have been at the boundary between the hard rock and the softer underlying terrain at least to start water sapping. The definitive boundary of the zone affected by the seepage process is quite obvious. Because the limited size and geographic distribution of the features argue for constrained source reservoirs [1] even relatively small amounts of water can lower the potentiometric level of the aquifer below the height of the head of the gullies, although has been indicated that as much as 250,000 cubic meters of water may have been involved in the formation of those structures [1]. Furthermore, because there is no sign of further sapping downhill, this must mean that the aquifer was depleted or frozen immediately after the time of the structure formation. The layer from which the gullies emanate has not recessed back far enough to expose further overhangs of the overlying harder layer of rock which is not visible anymore in large portions of the slopes and nothing else shows that the erosion is still continuing: many boulders along the scarps shown in Fig. 1 seem to be covered by dust and some barely project from beneath the surface. Fig. 1. MGS MOC Release No. MOC2-236, 22 June 2000. The area is 3 kilometers (1.9 miles) wide and 2.6 km (1.6 mi) high. Image Credit: NASA/JPL/Malin Space Science Systems. Discussion:  This clearly shows that the climatic conditions allowed no precipitation and consequent recharge of the aquifer in order to feed the seepage process and further surface water flow after the formation of the gullies. The present conditions have not changed since the landing of the Vikings which already occurred more than "a few" or "tens" of years ago; the surface of Mars is today so cold that any water within 2 or 3 km from the surface should be permanently frozen [3]. Recent studies of the aeolian features present at the Mars Pathfinder landing site [4] provide useful insight into weathering rates and processes over the history of the Ares Vallis region and Mars in general. The results show that erosional processes were in the order of <0.1 nm/yr and suggest that a cold and dry environment, very similar to that seen today, has prevailed since Late Hesperian - Early Amazonian times. This, of course, is consistent with the general idea that Mars was warmer and wetter in Noachian ages [5]; higher erosion rates (102 - 104 nm/yr) [4] would suggest water-driven erosion of the surface during the Noachian, followed by a decrease of the temperature of the planet in Post-Noachian ages deduced by a decrease in ero GORGONUM CHAOS:  G. Leone et al. sion rates [6] which in present times have fallen to values of  10-2 nm/yr [4]. This very low erosion rate which lasted all over the Amazonian to present times may have contributed to preserving the apparent freshness of some of the gullies seen today but does not justify the dusty appearance of others. The apparent lack of substantial wind erosion in some gullies may be attributed to insufficiently strong winds beating those particular areas in which they are, as seen elsewhere on Mars [7], while the dusty gullies may receive material thanks to a deflational wind regime which takes off dust from other surfaces and transports it there. These mechanisms of aeolian transport let a surface appear and disappear many times as well as being responsible for the motion of the Martian dunes and other aeolian features [7]. Conclusion:  Now, although some authors are trying to study the effectiveness of clathrates as an alternative to water in order to justify the claim on the youth of these structures [3], we think that water is the best candidate to explain the morphology of the gullies and that they simply formed during Amazonian ages perhaps thanks to a mechanism of exceptional warmth of the polar regions of the planet due to increased inclination of its spin axis [8]. However also formation during late Hesperian ages (when Mars' overall climate perhaps still allowed liquid water to flow on the surface) cannot be excluded. References: [1] Malin, M.C. and K.S. Edgett (2000) Science 288, 2330. [2] Edgett, K.S. and M.C. Malin (2000) JGR 105, 1623. [3] Kerr, R. A. (2000) Science 288, 2295. [4] Golombek, M. P. and N.T. Bridges (2000) JGR 105, 1841. [5] Carr, M.H. (1996) Water on Mars . [6] Carr, M.H. (1992) LPSC XXIII, 205. [7] Greeley, R. et al. (2000) JGR 105, 1829. [8] Tanaka, K. (2000) Science 288, 2325. 
