 FORMATION OF HEATED NEARSURFACE LAYERS DUE TO RADIATION EMITTED DURING A METEOROID IMPACT ONTO MARS. I.B.Kosarev, T.V.Losseva, I.V.Nemtchinov, Moscow, Institute for Dynamics of Geospheres RAS, 38 Leninsky Prospect, Bldg. 6, Moscow, 117334, Russia, e-mail: kosarev@idg.chph.ras.ru Radiation emitted during impacts onto Mars heats layers of Martian atmosphere adjacent to the surface causing so called 'thermal layer effect' (TLE). The thin heated layer may drastically change the gasdynamical flow behind the shock wave arising as a result of impact. Gasdynamical interaction of shock wave with the heated layer may cause the formation of a high-velocity jet moving along the Martian surface, vortices and intensive dust rising processes. Thus rocks may be eroded by the vortex winds induced due to such interaction. We estimate parameters of the heated layer formed due to radiation emitted by the meteoroid moving in the Martian atmosphere and by the plume arising after impact. Thermodynamical and spectral optical properties of the hot Martian atmosphere, vapors cosmic body materials and Martian soils are necessary to obtain radiation impulse parameters. In the radiative properties calculations we have considered absorption in fundamental band and two first overtones for diatomics, absorption in fundamental bands, hot and overtone vibrational bands of triatomics and also various electronic bands of molecules. The quantum-mechanical codes are used for opacity calculations of atomic species. The probabilities of electronic transitions and photoionization cross sections were calculated by using wave functions obtained through the methods of self-consistent field in non-relativistic and relativistic forms (the last one was used for heavy metal species included in the chemical composition of vapors of cosmic body materials). Fig. 1 In Fig. 1 the dependence of spectral mass absorption coefficients κε on photon energies ε for the temperature 4,000K and density 10-4 g/cm3 are presented. 3D multifrequency radiation transfer code was created to obtain integral and spectral characteristics and angular distributions of radiation emitted by the disturbed domain after the meteoroid impact. This code uses Sn-method based on direct solving the radiation transfer equations for large number of frequency points (about 35,000) and along great number of rays converging to an observation point. These rays should pack in the region. We have taken into account the large number of rays (about 600,000) to not miss small emission regions. We have used gasdynamical parameter distributions after the vertical impacts of 1-100 m in radii stony projectiles striking the Martian surface at the velocities of 11-20 km/s [1]. Fig. 2 In Fig. 2 time dependencies of total flux densities trough the horizontal areas spaced at the distances of R from the center of craters created after the vertical impacts of R0 in radii stony projectiles striking the ground surface at the velocities V0 are given. The maximum deposit of radiation belongs to visible range of wavelengths at the beginning of impulses and it belongs to infrared ranges of wavelengths at the end of impact impulses. Fig. 3 In Fig.3 the radiation spectrum (ϕε)i in visible range of wavelengths (ε = 1.7 - 3.2 eV) corresponding to the maximum flux density noted by the point 1 in Fig.2 is shown. The radiation emission process is very complicated. The role of lines in optical properties both of the Martian soil vapor and of the Martian air is important. The emitted radiation is essentially anizotropic. To understand what part of disturbed region emits we analyzed the spectral directionality diagrams depended on the wavelength range. Fig. 4  FORMATION OF HEATED NEARSURFACE LAYERS … I.B.Kosarev, T.V.Losseva, I.V.Nemtchinov In Fig. 4 the diagram ψi for the visible range of wavelengths is presented (point 1 in Fig.2). In this figure Martian air and the Martian soil vapor temperature distributions are also presented. The main part of radiation belongs to the region inside the shock wave. Internal part of the disturbed region is opaque. Fig. 5 In Fig. 5 the directionality diagram ψi in infrared range of wavelengths and corresponding Martian air and Martian soil temperature and density distributions are given (point 2 in Fig. 2). In this case the relative deposit of the visible radiation is decreased and the relative deposit of infrared radiation (ε = 1 - 1.7 eV) is increased. Here the observation point is located near and under the disturbed cloud. The heated vapor is not seen. The Martian air screens it. Fig. 6 In Fig. 6 the directionality diagram ψi in the far infrared range of wavelengths and Martian air and Martian soil temperature and density distributions are presented (point 3 in Fig.2). In this case the observation point is displaced inside the disturbed region. The maximum radiation emits in the range of wavelengths of 0.124 - 1 eV. The diagram is essentially differs from previous ones. The radiation emitted by the Martian air is almost isotropic at the azimuth angles from 30o until 90o and over the all angles in horizontal direction. So main features of the directionality aspect of emitted radiation are connected with the shielding action of dust curtain around the hot ascending cloud. The role of radiation is increased with meteoroid size growing. In Fig.7 the Martian soil and the Martian air temperature and density distribution and directionality diagrams for visible range of wavelengths at observation points 2 (point 4 in Fig. 2) and 10 km (point 5 in Fig. 2) are presented. Fig. 7 The problem of TLE is characterized by the ratio w = ρTL/ρ0, where ρTL is the initial thermal layer (TL) density and ρ0 is the density of the undisturbed atmosphere. For triggering TLE the value w must be less the critical value w*. Creation of TL is being provided by heat propagation in the atmosphere due to turbulent diffusion. Simultaneously the wave of heating propagates in the soil. We present parameters of TL arising due to the plume radiation emission after impact of the meteoroid with R0 = 20 m and V0 = 20 km/s near the landing site of Mars Pathfinder (Table 1) and due to radiation during the flight of meteoroids with different velocities (Table 2) at distance R = 2.5 km. Table 1. R, km Tgr , K h300 , cm I, J/cm 21.2 350 400 9. 2.5 234 1.3 Table 2. V0, km/s Tgr , K h300, cm I, J/cm 220 1700 420 52 15 700 350 19 11 270 2.4 Table 3 and 4 show parameters of TL arising due to the plume emission after impact and arising during the meteoroid flight for impact of the meteoroid with R0 = 100 m and V0 = 20 km/s, respectively. Table 3. R, km Tgr , K h300, cm I, J/cm 26 1400 400 80 10 700 600 46 Table 4. R, km Tgr , K h300, cm I, J/cm 26 1600 400 47 10 540 260 11 Here Tgr is the temperature at the surface, h300 is the height of a thermal layer with the temperature T≥300 K, I is the total specific radiation impulse. References: [1] Nemtchinov et al. (2001) AGU Fall Meeting 2001, (abstract). 
