 Correcting spectra of non-level surfaces from the Imager for Mars Pathfinder.  M.T. Lemmon1, J.R. Johnson2, K.E. Herkenhoff2, and P.H. Smith3, 1Dept. Of Physics, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, lemmon@physics.tamu.edu, 2USGS, 2255 N Gemini Dr., Flagstaff, AZ 86001, 3Univ. Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721.  Figure 1: A section of the IMP Insurance Pan showing the rock garden and upper rad cal target.  Introduction:  Imager for Mars Pathfinder (IMP) spectra of Martian soils can be used to determine the variety of soils at the Ares Vallis landing site [1,2].  These soils, like the rest of the Martian surface, are illuminated by both direct sunlight and diffuse skylight. The sky colors the surface materials, particularly by reddening them [3]. The IMP imaged two radiative calibration targets to allow correction of the spectra; the targets were expected to work well for level surfaces such as soils [4]. (The upper target can be seen with color chips in Figure 1 above.) Not everything of interest is conveniently level. We investigate the effect of sky illumination on spectra of surfaces of a variety of tilts. This study will be of interest for those interested in Martian soil mineralogy: the coloring by the sky adds uncertainty to the classification of minerals based on spectra. This uncertainty can have a systematic component based on patterns of imaging at certain times of day. The study will also advance the capabilities for determining rock spectra. Rock spectra were obtained, but the extreme tilts of the rock faces greatly enhance the importance of understanding the sky illumination [2]. Target images:  During the mission, 999 calibration target images were obtained [4]. Most of these were of the upper target (observed with morning and noon sequences, shadowed after noon); about one-sixth were of the lower target (Fig. 2; observed with afternoon sequences, shadowed in the morning).  Figure 2: The lower calibration target.  The lower target is especially suited to modeling, because it is farther from several spacecraft parts that block the sky from the upper target. We evaluate a radiative transfer model based on IMP data [5] for the conditions of a target image (solar elevation and azimuth, atmospheric opacity], resulting in a description of the distribution of illumination from the sky.  The target's reflectance is calibrated as a function of the direction of the incident light [4]. We combine the sky illumination model with the target reflectance information to model the appearance of the target. We include the effects of the stamen (shadow post), but do not model shadows from other spacecraft parts. After constructing a synthetic target image, we convolve it with the IMP point-spread function. An example is shown in Figure 3. The stamen itself (left) is not modeled; the shadow it casts (center) is modeled well.  Figure 3: Fits to white (red circles), gray (blue squares), and black (green diamonds) rings are shown. Dotted line does not include stray light, solid line does. Shown is the lower target, at 670 nm, on Sol 18.  Soil spectra: Soil images can be calibrated to reflectance by comparison with the illuminated white ring of the calibration target [4]. This technique should work well when the soil is parallel to the target, but should not work well for highly inclined surfaces. Because soils are somewhat level, soil spectra are thought to be generally accurate [1,2].   Correcting spectra of non-level surfaces:  M.T. Lemmon et al.  We have so far investigated two uncorrected illumination effects on IMP soil spectra. First, the calibration target is tilted 4° toward the northeast. Thus, the target is not a strictly level surface. We find that the assumption that the target is level introduces a timedependent error of only ~1% in absolute reflectivity. More importantly, the spectral effect of this error is <<1%, and is negligible as a source of error. Second, we investigated the effect of non-level soils. We assumed that the soils observed had a random distribution of slopes such that they were tilted toward arbitrary azimuths with slopes of 0°±10° (1-σ). We began with an assumed spectrum similar to bright soil. We put that spectrum in the illumination model using the full distribution of slopes and looked at the variation in output spectra. We found that the variation in absolute reflectivity could be substantial, especially at 9 AM observing conditions. With the Sun relatively low, a tilt toward or away from the Sun makes a substantial difference. The relative effect between wavelengths was more subdued, but also important (Fig. 4).  Figure 4: Red/blue ratio compared to absolute 750-nm reflectance. The input spectrum was characterized by the open square. The distribution in red is for noon observing conditions; the distribution in blue is for 9 AM observing conditions. The trapezoid roughly encloses the range of observed values form [2].  One conclusion is that the convolution of the true spectra with the illumination spectrum is important for making some distinctions. In particular, the absolute reflectance is a poor discriminator of soil types. We note that the effect described here does not explain the variation in spectral properties already observed [1,2]. Rock spectra: We will apply the above analysis to a wider variety of surface normals in order to investigate the illumination of rocks. We already know that the effect of the illumination can, under some conditions, be quite large: for example the side of Yogi that appeared overly red under noon illumination in the Gallery Pan [3]. We expect to determine a range of surface normals (for particular images), for which the illumination does not depend strongly upon the surface normal. We will then proceed with an analysis of the spectra of rock faces within this range. We do not expect it will be profitable to try to extract spectra of highly-reddened rock faces, because the surface normal uncertainties will become dominant.  Future work: Many of the target images are well modeled. Some are not fit well; many of the worse fits are from low sun elevations, for which the target was not calibrated. None the less, we intend to pursue the anomalies and determine how uncertainty intrinsic to the sky model affects the analysis. We also plan to use the target shadow data together with sky images to better constrain the sky model. In particular, this will provide better estimates of the dust absorption at all 12 wavelengths observed by IMP. We have so far looked at a random distribution of soil spectra. We will continue the analysis, looking instead at the specific geometries observed with the multi-spectral spots and Super-Pan images. We will use this to hunt for systematic effects caused by illumination variations. References: [1] P.H. Smith et al. (1997), Science, 278, 1758-1765. [2] J.F. Bell, III, et al. (2000) JGR, 105, 1721-1755. [3] N. Thomas et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 8795-8808. [4] R.J. Reid et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 8907-8925. [5] M.G. Tomasko et al. (1999), JGR, 104, 8987-9007.  
