 AQUEOUS FLOWS FORMED THE OUTFLOW CHANNELS ON MARS.   Neil M. Coleman,  Member, American Geophysical Union and the Health Physics Society (252 Johnston Lane, Mercersburg, PA  17236, nmc@nrc.gov). Introduction: The enormous outflow channels of Chryse Planitia and Amazonis Planitia  provide the best evidence that large quantities of water were released onto the martian surface earlier in the planet's history. Because liquid water is unstable at the surface in the current epoch, previous workers proposed alternatives to aqueous floods.  Carr [1]  summarizes these alternatives, which include erosion by glaciers, wind, lava, liquid hydrocarbons, liquid CO2, and even liquefaction of surface materials.  However, catastrophic flooding remains the most accepted cause because the features of martian channels closely mimic those found in the Channeled Scabland of eastern Washington [1,2,3,4]. The role of water in carving the martian channels has been challenged by a model in which CO2 in various phases erupts to form chaotic terrain, and resulting gassupported debris flows carve channels [5].  If this model were correct it would mean that little liquid water existed on Mars billions of years ago, reducing the chances that life could have evolved there.  However, the CO2 model is inconsistent with martian observations and studies of pyroclastic and other debris flows. The "White Mars" Model:  Hoffman [5] describes a model for the genesis of chaotic terrain and outflow channels on Mars.  This model invokes the catastrophic release of CO2 liquid and ice, which generates a gas lubricated "cryoclastic" debris flow.  Collapsed terrain forms as underground fluids are released, sediments are transported, and overlying blocks are undermined.  The resulting debris flow supposedly incises a deep channel in thick, unconsolidated regolith downslope from the center of eruption.  The martian surface is described as a layered icy regolith many km thick [5], with little erosional resistance.  Hoffman [5] identifies pyroclastic flows on Earth as analogs of martian events like those that formed Aromatum Chaos (1oS, 43oW), the source of Ravi Vallis.  The model is described as resolving several paradoxes, such as the presumed inability of an aquifer to yield enough water to produce the floods, and the apparent lack of carbonates at the surface. Discussion:  The CO2 model of channel formation is untenable because gas-supported flows cause little erosion beyond the eruption zone and do not carve channels.  Pyroclastic flows and other debris flows typically form lobate or sheetlike deposits of positive relief [6].  Low velocity pyroclastic flows tend to be thick and pond in depressions and valleys, smoothing the topography.  Higher velocity flows can surmount topographic barriers and create thin deposits that drape over the terrain.  Large caldera systems have produced extensive ignimbrite sheets with volumes that can exceed 2000 km3 [6].  Even when pyroclastic flows cause some local erosion, this is manifested not as channels but as unconformities within volcanic deposits. Gas-supported debris flows typically follow (rather than cut) pre-existing fluvial channels.  This fact could wrongly lead to the idea that gas-supported flows cut channels.  The tendency to follow channels is clearly seen in the May 18, 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens. Pyroclastic flows moved downslope after the north side of the mountain fell away.  The flows then encountered drainages leading into the North Fork of the Toutle River.  An extensive debris flow followed these channels for over 16 km, and mudflows occurred in many drainages.  Detailed topographic studies show a net accumulation of deposits downslope from Mount St. Helens [7].  The initial lateral blast flattened trees over a wide radius, but the stumps were often preserved, even some close to the mountain, due to minimal soil erosion. Some low-velocity debris flows can even overrun and preserve the grass at their base [8]. The movements of expanding gas-charged debris flows are not sensitive to small topographic gradients. Therefore, if Aromatum Chaos had been created by catastrophic release of CO2, the result would have been a radial explosion and debris field, especially given the locally level terrain (no channel was initially present) and the low surface gravity and atmospheric pressure. The origin of Ravi Vallis is entirely consistent with permafrost disruption and flow from an aquifer, as proposed by Carr [9].  This channel complex was carved eastward from Aromatum Chaos on a gentle pre-existing slope of <1degree [10].  It is an important clue, and not a coincidence, that the channel emanating from this chaos directly follows the gentle topographic slope. This shows that the erosional agent was likely an incompressible fluid like water that must closely follow topographic lows, carving well-defined channels. MOLA data show that Aromatum Chaos is ~1500 m deeper than the channel that flows away from it (a broad area west of the chaos also subsided without producing chaotic terrain).  This shows that flows originated at considerable depth, and that the chaos collapsed sometime after the aqueous flows began, perhaps during peak flow when undermining reached a maximum.  This collapse, along with aquifer depressur-ization, ultimately ended the groundwater discharge. Source Areas for Large Outflow Channels:  The large outflow channels on Mars were produced quite differently from Ravi Valles.  Kasei [11], Ares, and TiuSimud Valles likely formed through the cyclic release of floodwaters from impoundments dammed by ice and debris, analogous to the scabland flooding of eastern Washington [2].  The main Valles Marineris canyons, and associated chaotic terrain (e.g., Aureum Chaos), are likely sources for the series of floods that formed TiuSimud.  Layered deposits within the Valles Marineris suggest deposition of volcanic debris beneath ice or in lake waters [12].  Ares Vallis, which is ~1.6 km deep (MOLA pass 21) [13], is the final drainage for what may be the longest surface water pathway on Mars.  This system began as channels that drained the south polar  AQUEOUS FLOWS FORMED THE OUTFLOW CHANNELS:   Neil M. Coleman region, flowed into the Argyre basin, and overflowed Argyre at a low point near -35oS, 36oW.  Although the course is imprinted by some craters, MOLA data suggest hydraulic continuity northward from Argyre via Ares Vallis to Chryse.  The channels of Kasei Valles were likely formed by floodwaters released from impoundments in Echus Chasma, including the southernmost extremity that may formerly have been enclosed like Hebes Chasma.  The south channel of Kasei Valles reaches depths of ~3 km (MOLA pass 252 at 23oN) at a distance of >1000 km from likely source areas.  These deep channels could not have been incised into bedrock by gas-supported debris flows. Thick Regolith or Shallow Bedrock?  The idea that Mars may have a "layered icy regolith some 6 to 8 km thick" [5] is inconsistent with Viking images that show strong patterns of bedrock fracturing in regions such as Tharsis, Lunae Planum, Memnonia, and Elysium Planitia.  A thick regolith layer is also inconsistent with MOC images that show detailed layering in the walls of the Valles Marineris.  Many continuous layers would not be expected for an impact-generated regolith.  The layers likely consist of volcanic flows, based on their spectral properties, thicknesses, and cliff-forming topography [14].  This interpretation is consistent with widespread evidence of volcanism in Tharsis, Elysium, Hellas, and elsewhere, and is supported by the abundance of basaltic or andesitic rocks at the VL1, VL2, and Mars Pathfinder landing sites.   Deep erosion of bedrock, on the order of 1-3 km in various outflow channels, requires the intense hydrodynamic erosion associated with macroturbulence, plucking, and cavitation.  Baker [2] discusses these erosive processes in relation to the hydrodynamics of scabland floods.  Within catastrophic floods, flow obstructions spawn hydraulic vortices that can cause intense suction and the plucking of rocks from channel beds along lines of structural weakness.  In the Channeled Scabland this process eroded basalt bedrock and formed spectacular cataracts [2].  Cavitation can occur under special conditions, causing locally intense pressures capable of shattering strongly indurated rocks. Where is the Evidence for Chemical Weathering? If aqueous flows formed the outflow channels and created large temporary water bodies in the northern plains, then why is there no evidence of weathering products and carbonates in thermal emission scans of surface mineralogy?  The lack of these seems to lend credence to the "White Mars" concept.  However, Mukhin et al. [15] have shown that carbonates at the surface of Mars can readily be destroyed by long-term UV exposure.  Carbonates have been found at an abundance of ~1% in meteorite ALH84001 [16], which had an origin in the protected subsurface of Mars.  Clay minerals may simply be too scarce in soils to be detected by TES (i.e., <5%).  Eons of physical erosion by windblown particles could have removed the thin weathering rinds that formerly coated surface rocks, enriching the surface with very fine-grained dust abraded from exposed fresh rocks.  This dust would bear the crystalline signature of mafic extrusives, as observed by TES.  The ubiquitous dust may also mask the presence of evaporite deposits.  The Odyssey mission will provide much higher resolution scans of mineralogy that will better define surface compositions. Conclusions:   Outflow channels like Ravi Vallis were probably formed by the dramatic release of groundwater from confined aquifers when permafrost seals ruptured [9].  The larger outflow channels on Mars were likely carved by aqueous flows released from large icecovered surface impoundments, and not by catastrophic gas-lubricated debris flows.  The martian outflow channels, like the spectacular Channeled Scablands of eastern Washington, are monuments to the tremendous erosive power of large aqueous floods.   References:   [1] Carr, M. (1996) Water on Mars. [2] Baker, V. et al. (1981) Catastrophic Flooding: The origin of the Channeled Scabland. [3] Mars Channel Working Group (1983) GSA Bull., 94, 1035-1054. [4] Baker, V. (2001) Nature, 412, 228-236.  [5] Hoffman, N. (2000) Icarus, 146, 326-342. [6] Sparks, R. et al. (1997) Volcanic Plumes. [7] Lipman, P. et al. (1981) USGS Prof. Paper 1250 on Mount St. Helens. [8] Fisher, R. & Schmincke, H. (1984) Pyroclastic Rocks. [9] Carr, M. (1979) JGR, 84, 2995-3007. [10] NASA (2001) MOLA 1/4 degree grid. [11] Williams, R. et al. (2000) GRL, 27, 1073-1076.  [12] Chapman, M. & Tanaka, K. (2001) JGR, 106, 10087-10100.  [13] Smith, D. et al. (1998) Science, 279, 1686-1692.  [14] McEwen, A. et al. (1999) Nature, 397, 584586. [15] Mukhin, L. et al. (1996) Nature, 379, 141-143.  [16] Borg, L. et al. (1999) Science, 286, 90-93. 
