  DUST DEVILS ON MARS: RESULTS FROM THRESHOLD TESTS USING A VORTEX GENERATOR.  M. Balme1, R. Greeley1, B. Mickelson1, J. Iversen2, G. Beardmore1, D. Branson1, S. Metzger3, 1Ariz. State Univ., Dept. Geological Sciences, Box 871404, Tempe, AZ, 85287-1404, balme@dione.la.asu.edu, 2Iowa State Univ., AEEM Dept., 2271 Howe Hall, Room 1200, Ames, IA, 50011-2271, 3Dept. Geological Sciences, Univ. of Nevada-Reno, Reno, Nevada.   Introduction: Dust devils appear to be a common phenomenon on Mars, having been observed via landers [1], orbiters [2, 3] and inferred from meteorology data [4]. Dust devils provide an alternate mechanism for lifting fine particles to ambient winds, which appear on Mars to be insufficient to lift dust-grade particles by simple wind shear [5]. Intense dust devil activity could initiate dust storms by raising large amounts of material the atmosphere and could endanger future surface missions. Determining the conditions for raising dust, the flux and the size distribution of material in dust devils is therefore an important goal of Martian science.  There are two possible mechanisms that could entrain particles in a dust devil: 1) enhanced local wind speeds in the vortex that create large wind shear forces and 2) pressure deficit in the center of the vortex which provides 'lift' as it rapidly moves across the surface. Using a laboratory scale model for dust devils, this study seeks to 1) quantify the relative importance of enhanced wind speed versus pressure drop and to derive an empirical expression for dust devil threshold; 2) estimate the mass transport potential of dust devils; 3) investigate the effects of surface roughness and topography on dust devil morphology; 4) quantify the overall effects of low atmospheric pressure on the formation, structure and entrainment processes of dust devils on Mars.    Experimental Apparatus: The laboratory apparatus generates an atmospheric vortex above a flat surface and is described in detail in [6] and shown in figure 1. The vortex generator consists of one of two interchangeable vertical cylinders (45 or 75cm in diameter) containing a motor-test-bed containing 14 differential pressure transducers used to measure the surface pressure structure of the vortex. The distance between the cylinder and the tabletop (cylinder height), the height of the blades within the cylinder (blade height), and the angular velocity of the blades can be varied to give a wide range of geometries and intensities of atmospheric vortices. The apparatus is portable for use both under terrestrial atmospheric conditions and in the NASA-Ames Research Center Mars Surface Wind Tunnel (MARSWIT) facility to simulate Martian atmospheric conditions.  The laboratory simulation is advantageous to a numerical model because direct measurements of particle lifting threshold can be made; it also holds several advantages over terrestrial field measurements in that it is convenient, easily instrumented and, most importantly, can be moved to a low-pressure environment to simulate Mars. Field data are necessary, however, to validate the laboratory simulation and show that the pressure structure of the laboratory-generated vortex is similar to terrestrial and Martian dust devils (figure 2).    Figure 1. Photograph of Arizona State Univeristy Vortex Generator apparatus (ASUVG) showing cylinder and table-top. Dry ice is being used for flow visualization purposes. Note clear core and diffuse base of the vortex; very similar to some terrestrial dust devils.  Vortex Characterization Measurements:  A full series of tests using both vortex generator cylinders at a range of cylinder heights, generator speeds and two values of blade height generated a large amount of data which can be characterized by three general trends: 1) the pressure well depth at the center of the vortex (∆P) is proportional to the square of the angular velocity of the generator and is independent of the height of the blades above the table; 2) the radius of the vortex core is proportional to the inverse of the cylinder height and  DUST DEVILS ON MARS: RESULTS FROM LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS:  M. Balme et al.  is independent of angular velocity of the generator; 3) increasing blade height has little effect on ∆P but acts to decrease the core radius in the same way as increasing cylinder height. -1.4 -1.2 -1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 r' ∆P 'ASUVG 2001 Field data (Sinclair 1960) Pathfinder data (Schofield et al 1997) Figure 2. Comparison of pressure well formed beneath terrestrial, Martian and laboratory-generated atmospheric vortices. The data are scaled to the maximum pressure deficit (∆P'=1) and core radius (r'=1).  Vortex Threshold: As shown in figure 3, initial threshold tests under terrestrial conditions suggest that the vortex generator angular velocity required for threshold (ωo) is proportional to the square root of the product of particle diameter, gravitational acceleration and particle density (ρpgDp). This product is known as the particle layer weight. The experiments used particles with diameters 150-1750µm and densities of 1.17.6gcm-3 and ωo appears to be independent of particle size or density for a given particle layer weight. The radius of the vortex plays a key role in the angular velocity required to entrain material: vortices with smaller radii have lower values of ωo for a given particle layer weight. This is thought to be due to larger inward radial velocities associated with tighter vortices. As ∆P is independent of vortex radius, this suggests shear stress of the rotating wind is the dominant mechanism rather than the pressure deficit.   Future Experiments: Threshold tests using dustsized particles are currently being performed under ambient terrestrial conditions; preliminary results suggest that for these small particle sizes, ωo is much higher than would be predicted by the trend of figure 3. This is in agreement with results from boundary layer threshold tests such as [7] where threshold parameter (friction wind speed) is proportional to the root of particle layer weight only for larger, sand-grade particles.  To simulate Martian atmospheric conditions, vortex threshold tests will be performed at the MARSWIT facility. A variety of atmospheric pressures will be investigated. These experiments will determine whether the mechanism for dust lifting is the same at reduced pressures as for ambient terrestrial conditions. In order to assess the amount of material dust devils may entrain, further tests at low and ambient pressures to measure flux at threshold as a function of particle size and density are planned. 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 (ρpgDp) 1/2 (kg1/2m-1/2s-1) ω0 (r ad .s ec -1 )Walnut Shells Silia Sand Chromite Alumium Oxide Steel Grit Figure 3. Square root of particle layer weight vs angular velocity of vortex generator at threshold. Horizontal error bars represent range of particle sizes used.  The final type of experiments will use models of crater, scarps and other landforms to investigate how surface topography effects the morphology and structure of dust devils. Because the tabletop in the vortex generator can be moved horizontally, observations of tracks caused by the vortex passing over landforms can be performed in order to compare with MOC images of tracks thought to be caused by the passage of dust devils [3].  References: [1] Metzger et al. (1999) GRL, 26, 2781-2784; [2] Thomas and Gierasch (1985) Science, 230, 175-177; [3] Edgett and Malin, (2000) LPSC XXXI, Abstr. 1073; [4] Schofield et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1752-1758; [5] Greeley and Iversen (1985) Wind as a Geological Process, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; [6] Greeley et al. (2001), LPSC XXXII, Abstr. 1888. [7] Iversen et al. (1976), Icarus, 29, 381-393.   
