 HYDROGEN LOSS IN IRON-BEARING MARS CLAYS (OR PALAGONITE) IS OXIDATION, NOT "DEHYDROXLATION".  D. M. Burt1,2 , 1Visiting Scientist, LPI (Lunar and Planetary Institute, 3600 Bay Area Blvd., Houston, TX 77058-1113; Burt@lpi.usra.edu), 2ASU (Dept. of Geological Sciences, Arizona State Univ., Box 871404, Tempe, AZ 85287-1404; DBurt@asu.edu).   Introduction:  Although recent Thermal Emission Spectrometer (TES) and some earlier spectral data [1] suggest that Mars lacks hydrous clay minerals, other evidence suggests that they should be there, and should contain considerable iron. If clays are not present, ironbearing disordered palagonite (hydrated basaltic glass) probably is. In either case, the strongly oxidizing surface of Mars means that Fe-clays or palagonites would have been subject to loss of hydrogen [2,3] via nondestructive, reversible oxidation reactions that form  oxy-clays (or oxy-glasses) with crystal structures subtly altered from the originals. This unfamiliar but welldocumented reaction was misleadingly labelled "dehydroxylation" by [4,5], who deduced that the structural changes (lack of hydroxyls) might lead to difficulty in spectral identification of the resulting oxy-clays (cf. [6]). This hypothesis has not been adequately tested experimentally. Arguments Against Mars Clays:  Mars may be too cold and dry to form hydroxyl-bearing clays by hydrous chemical weathering under present climatic conditions; instead, physical weathering may dominate  [1]. If any hydrous phase is formed, it may be palagonite, a nearly amorphous, partially hydrated alteration product of basaltic glass [7]. Palagonite, moreover, commonly fits Mars' spectra better than clays [8]. Viking and Pathfinder soil analytical data can be modelled (not always well), by mixtures consisting mainly of salts and fresh rocks [9, 10], because neither analytical data set includes H2O. Not explained by proponents of such mixing is how salts form without aqueous alteration  (noted by [11]). Finally, as mentioned above, TES and earlier spectral data have failed to detect clay minerals on the surface of Mars [1,8]. Arguments For Mars Clays:  The martian surface shows abundant geomorphic evidence for the earlier presence of liquid water (both flowing and standing); interactions of such water with basaltic rocks typically produce clays, especially iron-rich smectites, even at low T. In this regard, ordered smectite-group clay minerals have been found in SNC meteorites, presumably from Mars [12], and mass movement features observed on Mars could imply lubrication by wet clays. Viking and Pathfinder soil analyses can be modeled in terms of smectite-group clays (if not uniquely, as mentioned above) [10]. A problem with such modeling is the extremely variable compositions of smectite-group clay minerals (see below), as well as the possibly unwarranted assumption that all S is present as Mg-sulfate salt (Mg, in general, would probably reside preferentially in the octahedral sites of a clay mineral, allowing some other ion to combine with S). Experimental simulations of the Viking Labeled Release (LR) experiment match the Mars observations better with Fe-rich smectites than with palagonites [13]. Finally ([2-5] and below), H-loss from oxidation of Fe-bearing clay minerals might explain the failure to identify them spectroscopically, particularly if this has happened to a variable extent in mixtures of different clay minerals. Clay Mineralogy:  Most common natural clay minerals can be classified as either dioctahedral or trioctahedral. The former minerals (e.g., kaolinite, []Al2Si2O5(OH)4) have a vacancy plus 2 trivalent cations (e.g., Al3+ or Fe3+) filling the octahedral layer; the latter (e.g.,  serpentine, Mg3Si2O5(OH)4) have  no vacancies and 3 divalent  cations (e.g., Mg2+ or Fe2+) filling this layer. They can be further classified by the vertical stacking of these octahedral layers (O) with tetrahedral layers (T), as either 1:1 (T-O; common examples include kaolinite and serpentine, above), or 2:1 (T-O-T; common examples include pyrophyllite and talc). A layer of charged monovalent (typically K+) or divalent (e.g., Ca2+) cations between the 2:1 layers yields a mica or brittle mica. A metal hydroxide layer between the 2:1 layers yields a chlorite (T-O-T, O), with a formula similar to that of a 1:1 (T-O) structure. On Earth, all of the above clay minerals persist indefinitely in sediments, unlike the smectites, discussed next. Despite their stability, they have been little discussed in terms of the possible mineralogy of Mars. Smectites, the 2:1 expandable clays, are metastable weathering products, mainly of volcanic rocks; eventually they change into other clay minerals in terrestrial sediments. Compositionally, they are by far the least predictable clays, with variable amounts of water molecules (reversibly lost on drying) and easily exchangeable charged cations (almost anything) in the interlayer sites. Charge balance, as in micas, is maintained by substitutions in the tetrahedral or octahedral sites, but the interlayer charge is much less than in micas. Typical dioctahedral smectites are montmorillonite and nontronite (its Fe-equivalent); a typical trioctahedral smectite is saponite. These three minerals have been cited in modeling the compositions of Viking soils [14].  MARS OXY-CLAYS:  D. M. Burt  Changes in Smectites: Easy cation exchange of the ions in the interlayer sites is typical of smectites. On heating, smectites first undergo simple dehydration (loss of interlayer water molecules), causing reversible shrinkage, and then, like all other clay minerals at high temperatures, they undergo dehydroxylation (loss of structural hydroxyls, non-reversible). If they contain Fe2+, they can undergo a reaction involving reversible H-loss on oxidation, as discussed below.  Dehydroxlation vs. Dehydrogenation (Oxidation): Dehydroxylation is the irreversible dehydration reaction undergone when a clay such as kaolinite is fired into a ceramic object such as a coffee mug. It  can be written as: 2(OH)-  =  O2-  + H2O. (in clay) (in fired product) In the release of a single molecule of water, two hydroxyl ions are lost, and a single oxide ion is left behind. This results, in general,  in an irreversible change in the crystal structure, because the single oxide ion has a much smaller volume than the two initial hydroxyls. This type of reaction can occur on heating any hydrous mineral. High temperatures (several hundred degrees) are usually required to destroy the crystal structure. In dehydrogenation reactions, on the other hand, the initial mineral must contain, in addition to hydroxyl, a transition element of variable valence (usually Fe, but Mn, Cr, or Co, for example, should also work). A typical reaction can be represented as: Fe2+(OH)- = Fe3+O2-  +  1/2H2. (in hydro-clay) (in oxy-clay) Such a solid state reaction will go to the right at room temperature or below if the clay is exposed to a vacuum (as for hydrous iron minerals in a meteorite), or if the clay is exposed to strongly oxidizing conditions (as on the surface of Mars). In this oxidation reaction, Fe2+ loses an electron, and (OH)- gains it, forming O2- plus hydrogen, which diffuses out of the crystal structure (note that H  diffuses readily through most solids). Once outside the crystal, the H2 can combine with another element, such as O2, forming H2O. This type of reaction is, unfortunately, usually balanced with O2 and H2O, which is not necessary. Oxidation, as defined by chemists, involves a transfer of electrons, not O, and F, Cl, and S, for example, can also act as oxidants. Such an dehydrogenation reaction does not (in general) change the crystal structure of the mineral, and therefore is reversible (as is the rehydration of smectites, the expandable clays, as mentioned above). Note that the crystal structure is not completely unchanged, however, because O2- is smaller and more highly charged than OH-, and Fe3+ is smaller and more highly charged than Fe2+. These reactions are well known in amphiboles and micas, in addition to clays, and are discussed in detail for clays in [2,3]. In particular, for Fe-substituted saponite [3, Fig. 4] shows that a wide range of completely OH-free oxy-saponite compositions are theoretically possible. Implications for Mars:  The major implications of such oxy-clay-forming reactions for Mars [4-6] is that spectroscopic identification of clay minerals, which mainly depends on detecting interactions of metal ions with the hydroxyl ion, will be made difficult to impossible by the oxy-substitution (and also by the substitution of other ions, such as fluoride, for hydroxyl). Unfortunatedly, Burns [4,5] called the formation of oxyclays "dehydroxylation", a term which, as discussed above, usually refers to a completely different type of chemical reaction that can only occur at high T. His terminology may have confused many readers. Certainly suggestions about oxy-clays [2-6], despite their possible relevance to the recent failure of TES to identify clay minerals on Mars, appear to have been largely overlooked. This hypothesis requires studying spectra of dehydrogenated oxy-clays for comparison with spectra obtained from Mars. Preparing Fe2+-rich clays in the oxidizing environment of Earth is not easy, but is certainly not impossible; they do form naturally beneath the water table or ocean at many places on Earth (discussion in [3,5]), and presumably could have done so on early Mars, particularly if the surface environment was less oxidizing than it is today. Even if disordered iron-rich palagonites rather than ordered clay minerals are  the  major weathering products on Mars, some of the hydrogen in palagonite could be lost by the same mechanism, forming oxypalagonites [3]. Burt [3] further suggested strongly oxidizing oxy-clays might provide one explanation for the results of the Viking Gas Exchange (GEx) experiment on Mars; this suggestion remains to be tested. Many other oxidants, most involving peroxide or superoxide compounds, have been suggested (e.g., review by [15]). References: [1] Christensen et al. (2001) JGR, 106, 23823-23871.[2] Burt D. M. (1998) Rev. Mineral., 19, 561599. [3] Burt D. M. (1999) Proc. LPSC, 19, 423-432. [4] Burns R. G. (1992) LPI Tech. Rept. 92-4, 6-7. [5] Burns R.G. (1993) GCA, 57, 4555-4574. [6] Bishop J. L. et al. (1993), GCA, 57, 4583-4595. [7] Allen C. C. et al. (1981) Icarus, 45, 347-369. [8] Soderblom L. A. (1992) in Mars, Univ. AZ. Press, 557-593. [9] Clark B. C. (1993) GCA, 57, 4575-4581. [10] Bell J. F. III et al. (2000) JGR, 105, 17211755. [11] McLennan S. M. (1999) LPS XXX, #1700. [12] Gooding J. L. (1992) Icarus, 99, 28-41. [13] Banin A. and Margulies L. (1983) Nature, 305, 523-526. [14] Toulmin P. III et al. (1977) JGR, 82, 4625-4634. [15] Zent A. P. and McKay C. P. (1994) Icarus, 108, 146-157.  
