 MARS POLAR WIND STREAKS AS SUBLIMATION-AIDED WIND INDICATORS Lynn D. V. Neakrase, Ronald Greeley, Department of Geological Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe.  neakrase@asu.edu Introduction Wind streaks can be used to determine the wind patterns on Mars (1,2).  As a result of the data from both the Viking missions and more recent atmospheric information from Mars Pathfinder, refinements in the NASA Ames Mars General Circulation Model (GCM) were made, including better predictions for the polar regions (2).  Polar wind patterns are difficult to discern because of the great seasonal variability of the winds and the absence of good markers such as wind streaks.  Previously, the only measurable indicators of polar winds were cloud patterns and frost streaks, neither of which are year-round events (1). More recently, since the return of Mars Orbiter Camera (MOC) images from Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) small wind streaks were observed and compared to the predictions of the GCM at the Mars Polar Lander (MPL) site (3). Some of the streaks correlated well with GCM predictions; however the majority of the streaks did not, possibly because the GCM does not predict the local wind patterns. Polar wind streaks can be divided into two categories, Type A and Type B (4).  Type A streaks are primarily small (100-150m long), narrow streaks that have nearly circular sources ranging from 10 to 50 m in diameter.  The streaks are dark compared to the background materials.  Type B are more diffuse tails (50100m in length) that are also darker than the background materials.  Their source areas are 50150 m in diameter and are irregularly shaped (non-circular). Approach Wind streaks from 15 MOC images were compared to two different sets of predictions from the GCM.  The 6 cells closest to the MPL site were averaged to estimate the wind patterns surrounding the area of the MOC images. Instantaneous wind patterns were examined by using the GCM predictions from the closest time interval to the time the image was acquired (within 1.5 hrs).  Because wind streaks are not instantaneous events, an average of the predictions for the 6 days leading up to the time of the images were also examined.  Statistical analyses were used to determine if there was better correlation from instantaneous or timeaveraged wind patterns.  The final analysis examined the relation between Type A and Type B streaks and the wind streak statistics. The statistical method employed a 95% confidence interval in order to compare the wind streaks to the GCM predictions.  Comparisons were gauged by examining the p-value, or the significance level of a normal or t-distribution of the data.  Values that were above the 5% significance level were understood to be in good correlation to the GCM. Conclusions In general, all the wind streaks were poor matches to the GCM predictions.  More specifically, only 3 of 15 images showed excellent correlation with the GCM.  This observation could indicate two possibilities; poor predictability of these features using GCM predictions or some systematic deflection of the winds at resolutions too detailed to be predicted by the GCM. Topography could be a significant factor in the deflecting wind patterns.  The area surrounding the MPL site is known to have many scarps and depressions that could alter wind patterns.  Small topographic features could account for the significant differences between the observations and the predictions. Measurement errors could also be a factor preventing good correlation.  Because Type B wind streaks are diffuse, directions are difficult to determine.  In the same manner, using all six  NEAKRASE AND GREELEY: MARS POLAR WIND STREAKS GCM cells surrounding the area could also introduce wind vectors not associated with the wind streak formation that could also hinder correlation. There also seems to be no azimuthal preference for good correlation with the GCM. Neither Type A nor Type B streaks demonstrate a preferential agreement with the GCM predictions.  This lack of correlation could be the result of the low resolution of the GCM, systematic deflections due to topography, or errors in measurement. Wind patterns for the southern polar region are complicated during the transition from southern spring to summer due to complex interactions associated with the waning of the seasonal ice cap.  The GCM predicts the almost chaotic pattern of shifting winds during this same time.  However, the observations correlate poorly to the GCM predictions.  The observations suggest that wind streaks (and the rest of the surface) form and change over a few days.  Topographic deflections could be the major cause of the discrepancies observed between the GCM and the observations. Future GCM analyses should incorporate other averages over many different time periods to check for more appropriate wind patterns. The incorporation of Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA) topography data with a meso-scale model should allow topographic deflections to be addressed.  Combining such analyses should constrain the formation times for polar wind streaks, which is essential for understanding the sublimation processes near the South Pole of Mars. References 1  Thomas, P., Icarus, 48, 76-90, 1981. 2  Pollack et al., JGR, 95, 1447-1473, 1990. 3  Neakrase et al., Abstracts for XXIII LPSC, 2001 4  Neakrase,  M.S. Thesis, Dept. of Geologic Sciences, Arizona State University, 2001. Figure 1.  Rose plots showing wind streak measurements compared to GCM predictions for the days of the MOC images and the 6 days prior to the MOC images.  Wind streak type is denoted by A or B corresponding to Type A or Type B respectively.  Widths of arcs denote ranges in the uncertainties for each of the data represented.  Cross-hatching represents overlaps in the GCM data.  North is at the top of each circle. 
