 ALTERNATIVE ALTERATION PATHWAYS AT MARS AND DARK MINERAL ANALOGS.  W. M. Calvin1, A. Fallacaro1 and V. E. Hamilton2, 1Dept of Geological Sciences, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89503 (wcalvin@unr.edu), 2Dept. of Geological Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287   SUMMARY   The present Martian atmosphere, with its lack of abundant oxygen, provides different alteration pathways than the present surface of the Earth.  Other environments that mimic these Mars conditions include Archean Earth and carbonaceous chondrites.  A general similarity is seen between the alteration products in Archean Iron Formation and carbonaceous chondrites and, in addition, both these assemblages are associated with biotic precursors or biological precipitation.  The identification of coarsely crystalline hematite in moderate to low-albedo regions and its preferred interpretation as an aqueous precipitate [e.g. 1] also supports the hypothesis of dark alteration scenarios for Mars. We examine the spectral properties of these and other candidate dark alteration minerals and their compatibility with spectra from TES and IMP.  IRON FORMATION  Banded Iron Formation (BIF) is common in Archean outcrops and is associated with shallow sea precipitation or alternatively sub-aqueous hydrothermal alteration and occurs in four dominant facies: silicate, sulfide, carbonate and oxide [e.g. 2].  In the field these facies grade into each other and are often found interleaved in stratigraphic column.  The dominant alteration materials identified in carbonaceous chondrites are similar to the four facies of iron-formation as shown in Table 1.  It may be that in bulk the spectral properties of thin laminated units are masked by other materials.  Alternately, Mars may only express the specific geochemical stability regime of a single facies, rather than the alternating sequences seen on Earth.  Previous work [3,4] has explored the silicate facies minerals in some detail and we will show examples of silicate endmembers which might be compatible with TES spectra (Fig. 1).  Complementary work will begin examination of the Archean deposits in the Lake Superior region of North America this year.  CARBONACEOUS CHONDRITES The carbonaceous chondrites as a group are noted for their association with  the most chemically primitive material in sample collections.  Although the carbonaceous chondrites are similar enough to stand out as a group from other chondrites, there is substantial mineralogic and petrologic diversity within the class. In particular presence and amount of matrix materials and inferred degree of aqueous alteration varies substantially.  We measured samples of Murray (CM), Murchison (CM), Orgueil (CI) and Allende (CV) in emissivity at the ASU lab.  Allende (unaltered) shows features of the dominant pyroxene composition.  Exploration of the spectral properties of altered endmembers (e.g. Murray, Figure 1) is underway and synthesis of these spectra as linear mixtures of component elements will be presented.  HYDROUS CARBONATES It is interesting to note that two of the regions associated with hematite in TES data were previously noted as being spectroscopically unusual in  Table 1: Common Low-Temperature Alteration Minerals in Low-O2 Environments Facies Archean Iron Formation Carbonaceous Chondrites Oxide Magnetite/Hematite Magnetite, Fe-oxy-hydroxides Sulfide Pyrite Fe,Ni Sulfides, Tochilonite Silicate Greenalite, Stilpnomelane Cronstedtite, Greenalite  Chamosite, Minnasotaite Antigorite, Chrysotile Carbonate Siderite (none/minor)  carbonaceous cherts are also found carbon forms a detrital carbonaceous in Archean deposits matrix DARK ALTERATION PATHWAYS FOR MARS:  W.M. Calvin, A. Fallacaro, and V.E. Hamilton  the Mariner 6/7 infrared spectrometer data sets [5,6].  The main Meridiani site had weak features that are possibly associated with hydrous carbonates [5] and the Aram Chaos site was noted has being more hydrated than other moderate to low albedo regions [6]. Hydrous carbonates offer a possible way to sequester carbonates on Mars without the usual strong spectral features associated with anhydrous minerals such as calcite, dolomite or siderite.  These are low temperature alteration products in regions with high dissolved CO2.  A terrestrial analog site is the New Idria mine in California, where the surface weathering zone is characterized by abundant hydrous carbonate alteration, especially iron bearing endmembers and amorphous iron oxides [e.g. 7]. Samples of iron coated and stained materials were acquired and have been measured in emissivity at ASU (Figure 1).  ROCK COATINGS AND VARNISH  From both the Viking and Pathfinder landed missions evidence of apparently three types of rock coatings are noted on Mars.  The first is unconsolidated drift or accumulations of atmospheric dust, noted by their characteristic red color in contrast to underlying dark rocks.  The second are darker, but sill reddish-colored surfaces with unique spectral shapes in the IMP data, presumed to be weathering rinds or more consolidated drift materials on rocks or surface units.  A third type of coating is inferred from photometric observations of rocks, suggesting that the surfaces of some grey rocks are smoother with additional forward scattering and other photometric parameters that would indicate thin coatings of a fully coherent layer, similar to terrestrial desert varnish [e.g. 8,9].      On Earth,  desert varnishes form through the interaction with microbes  creating a surface from a few 10's to a few 100 μm in thickness, dominantly composed of Mn- and Fe-oxides and clays.  These coatings will suppress the features of underlying rock materials but bulk rock properties are still visible. In cases of thick varnish, the underlying rock can be completely obscured and spectra show the dominant contribution from the clay minerals forming the varnish [10].    It is also possible that Mars varnish coatings might instead be either amorphous, mono or di-sulfide iron phases (FeSx).  FeS is noted to precipitate in low temperature environments through interaction with H2S.  In particular, ferric minerals such as goethite and hematite, when they are sufficiently fine-grained, react with H2S in solution to form, black, x-ray amorphous FeS, with subsequent transformation to pyrite (FeS2) [11].   In most low-temperature sedimentary systems pyrrhotite  or magnetic also occurs in close association with pyrite. Archean basalt subjected to subaqueous alteration in an N2 /CO2 /H2/H2S atmosphere forms a black, x-ray amorphous FeS precipitate which creates a "protective coating" that inhibits further alteration of the basalt  [12]. We will show that simple spectral combinations of pyrite, pyrrhotite and a Mt Etna basalt provided a very close match to IMP spectra of dark rocks and also compare with spectra of terrestrial desert varnish surfaces.   References: [1] Christensen et al. JGR, 106, 23873, 2001 . [2] James, Econ. Geol. 49, 235, 1954. [3] Calvin, GRL, 25, 1597, 1998. [4] Calvin and King, Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 32, 693, 1997. [5] Calvin et al. JGR, 99, 14659, 1994. [6]  Calvin, JGR, 102, 9097, 1997.  [7] Mumpton et al., Am. Mineral., 50, 1893, 1965. [8] Guinness et al., JGR, 102, 28687, 1997. [9] Johnson et al., JGR, 104, 8809, 1999. [10] Rivard et al., IEEE Trans. Geosci, Rem. Sens., 31, 284, 1993. [11] Berner, J. Geology, 72, 293, 1964. [12] Wiggering, Chem. Geol., 85, 311, 1990. Wavenumber (cm-1) 400600800100012001400 Em is si vi ty 0.90 0.95 1.00 Pyroaurite Murray (CM Chondrite) Chamosite Figure 1: Spectra of possible alteration analogs. Chamosite, pyroaurite, and CM chondrite Murray. 
