 The Effect of Distance Change on the Alpha-Mode Abundances for the Pathfinder APXS.  C. N. Foley1, T. E. Economou1, R. N. Clayton2, 1Laboratory for Astrophysics and Space Research University of Chicago, University of Chicago, 933 E. 56th St., Chicago, IL, 60637, USA, e-mail: nfoley@geosci.uchicago.edu, 2Enrico Fermi Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago IL, 60637, USA   Introduction: The effects of distance variation on abundances for Pathfinder APXS measurements in the alpha mode have been examined using both theoretical and experimental techniques.  The distribution of scattering angles from a sample was defined for the APXS instrument geometry at a certain distance. However, changes in measurement distance which occurred with the APXS on Mars, will affect the distribution of samplescattering angles. For some light elements, the scattering cross section exhibits strong angular dependence [1]. This is due to the variation in the amount of resonant nuclear scattering, which is a function of alpha energy and scattering angle [1]. Therefore, any change in the angular distribution will affect the backscattered intensity from these elements and thus the elemental composition derived from these intensities.  This variation of alpha scattering intensity with distance was observed during calibration of an instrument similar to the Pathfinder APXS, called the AXS. An example of such an alpha spectrum change is illustrated in figure 1. This figure shows the alpha spectra for the basalt geostandard, BCR1 (normalized to the alpha signal in channels indicated on the figure) at various distances. The sample oxygen signal, which is a rectangular-like feature in channels 50 through 150, shows the most significant relative change in intensity as a function of distance. Because the Pathfinder APXS measurements on Mars were done at distances that differed from the original calibration distance by a few millimeters, we are investigating the effect of distance changes on the Pathfinder results. Since the alpha-mode determines the oxygen abundances which are used to infer the amounts of water in the Pathfinder samples, these analyses will assist in determining the accuracy of previously reported values of inferred water content [2].  Figure 1: The AXS alpha spectra for BCR1 at different measurement distances.   Experiment: The AXS was used to experimentally examine the effects of distance changes on non-Rutherford scattering intensities. The AXS has a different geometry from the APXS. In particular, the curium sources and the sample are closer to the smaller alpha detector of the AXS. Furthermore, the AXS has only five curium sources, one alpha detector, and an X-ray detector as opposed to the APXS geometry which is described in [3]. Nevertheless, since the relative intensities from a particular sample vary as a function of scattering-angle distribution for the same alpha energy, a relationship between AXS and Pathfinder samples may be determined. We calculated the change in the distribution of scattering angles for alpha particles with distance for both the AXS and   Pathfinder APXS Distance Effects:  C. N. Foley, T. E. Economou, and R. N. Clayton  the APXS. This enabled inter-comparison between the two instruments.  Oxides, geostandard powders, and rocks were examined with the AXS at various distances to measure the distance dependence of alpha signal due to non-Rutherford nuclear scattering. The intensity change for an element can then be compared with the change predicted from the calculations. Results: AXS measurements reveal that major rock-forming elements including sodium, magnesium, aluminum, and calcium have no significant changes due to resonant scattering, while carbon, oxygen, and silicon have significant intensity changes over the pertinent distance change. The AXS intensity is predicted to increase for these elements based on previous theoretical and experimental results discussed by [4], [5], and [6] respectively. The intensity for the resonant scattering of carbon, oxygen, and silicon increase with higher scattering angles, which are more prevalent for more distant samples. Because no sample-carbon was detected in the Pathfinder rocks and soils, the increase in  carbon signal with distance is not pertinent to the Pathfinder analyses. However, both oxygen and silicon are major sample-elements, and therefore calculation of the distance effects on their measurement is essential.  The Pathfinder measurement distances were approximately six to fifteen mm greater than the laboratory calibration distance. This distance variation was calculated by assuming that the intensity of scattered alpha particles decreases by a factor of the inverse square of the distance traversed.  The variation in oxygen and silicon alpha signals with distance predicted from the calculations as well as the experimental results will be used to re-evaluate the Pathfinder abundances. The net effects on the abundances are to decrease the oxygen and silicon abundances by amounts which we will quantify.  References: [1] Patterson J. H. et al. (1965) JGR, 70, 1311-1327. [2]  Foley C. N. et al. (2001) LPSC 32. [3] Rieder R. et al. (1997) JGR, 102, 4027-4044. [4] Bittner J. W. et al. (1954) Phys. Rev., 96, 347-377. [5] John J. et al. (1969) Phys. Rev., 181, 14551464. [6] Coban A. et al. (2000) Nuc. Phys. A., 678, 3-10.   
