 TOPOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF CANDIDATE MARS EXPLORATION ROVER LANDING SITES FROM MOC NARROW ANGLE STEREOIMAGES.  R. L. Kirk, E. Howington-Kraus, and B. A. Archinal, U.S. Geological Survey, (2255 N. Gemini Dr., Flagstaff, AZ  86001, rkirk@usgs.gov). Introduction:  In this abstract we present the results of initial topographic mapping and roughness analysis of candidate Mars Exploration Rover (MER) landing sites using high-resolution images from the Mars Global Surveyor Mars Orbiter Camera Narrow-Angle subsystem (MGS MOC-NA; [1]).  MER mission rules place limits on the probability distribution of slopes over various baseline lengths for a site to be considered safe.  Slope probabilities over the longest baselines can be estimated with data from the Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA; [2]), which has high accuracy but is limited by its 300 m along-track sample spacing. Addressing the safety criterion for a 5-m baseline (≤1% probability of slopes ≥15°), however, has only recently become possible as MOC stereopairs of many of the candidate sites with ~3 m/pixel resolution have been obtained.  In comparison, the best previous (Viking Orbiter) images of most sites have resolutions 50-100 m/pixel and are not in stereo [3].  The minimum separation of independent stereo measurements ("posts") is about 3 pixels because of the necessity of matching finite-sized image patches, so the MOC images support the production of stereo digital elevation models (DEMs) at ~10 m/post.  To evaluate slopes on the 5-m baseline of the MER safety criterion, we use photoclinometry, or shape-from-shading [4] to produce DEMs with singlepixel resolution, calibrating them against the stereo results so that the relief estimated by the two methods is consistent. Sites and Images:  As this is written, four primary sites ("Hematite" in Terra Meridiani, Melas Chasma, Gusev crater, and Isidis Planitia) and two backup sites (Eos Chasma, Athabasca Vallis) have been selected as candidates for MER landings. An automated search of the catalog of MOC-NA images available in July 2001 (including MER site images obtained through mission phase E06) yielded 18 candidate image pairs of landing sites (out of 158 pairs planetwide), based on overlap of their latitude-longitude bounding boxes, usable stereo convergence, and compatible illumination (cf. [3]).  Visual examination of the actual extent of overlap (given targeting uncertainties) and image quality yielded the 4 good sterepairs listed in Table 1.  Two other pairs (not listed) had very narrow overlap and one other had good overlap but low image contrast.  Table 1 also lists a pair of images covering an area immediately adjacent to the Mars Pathfinder landing site.  Comparison of the DEM derived from this pair with topographic mapping based on Viking [5] and Pathfinder IMP [6] images provides a useful check on the validity of our results for the other sites. The Pathfinder pair covers both the 1.6-km "Big Crater" visible from the lander, and plains to the south of the crater that closely resemble the landing point in monoscopic images.  The crater itself was excluded from our analysis of slope distributions.  The Melas pair, located west of the center of the landing ellipse, contains scattered flat-topped plateaux typically 0.5-2 km in horizontal extent and 20-30 m high, and a few bright patches with little apparent relief.  The area between the plateaux (and the tops of some of them) is almost entirely covered by fine (10-20 m wavelength) dunes. Although the relative proportions of dunes, plateaux, and bright regions vary, this sample is generally representative of the landing ellipse as a whole.  The Gusev pair covers both a 22-km crater at the eastern tip of the landing ellipse and the floor of Gusev itself south of this.  The interior of the smaller crater is covered with partially buried craters, whereas the floor of Gusev is dominated by isolated, flat-topped knobs tens to hundreds of meters across and 10-30 m high, and is much rougher. The texture revealed by monoscopic images of the rest of the landing ellipse ranges between these two extremes of roughness.  The Isidis pair is located about 100 km west of the center of the landing ellipse and contains partially buried and eroded craters and occasional channels interspersed with fine ridges. The surface seen in images within the ellipse is extremely similar. Finally, the Eos pair crosses the center of the landing ellipse and contains hills as high as 200 m and relatively deep and well preserved (compared to the other sites) impact craters on a background of plains with low ridges and bright streaks superficially similar to the Pathfinder site. This stereopair is also quite representative of its respective landing ellipse. Additional images of the landing sites were obtained in mission phases E09 and E10, after clearing of the global dust storms.  The majority of these images are oblique, increasing the chances of useful stereo where they overlap earlier images.  We have identified 5 additional useful stereopairs of the prime and backup sites (including a pair with narrow overlap for Hematite but unfortunately no pairs for Athabasca) and will report on the results of mapping with them. Additional images are likely to be obtained in the future; although operational difficulties currently prevent imaging in the across-track stereo (ROTO) geometry, an along-track pointing mode that also gives good stereo is in use.  Even future nadir images may yield useful stereopairs if they overlap the oblique images already obtained.  Photoclinometric analysis of unpaired images may extend coverage of the landing sites even further, if methods of calibration to MOLA data applicable to low latitudes can be developed. Topographic Mapping:  Our methodology for stereomapping and photoclinometry is described in more detail in a recent abstract [7].  The software packages, specialized hardware, and workflow for the MOC mapping reported here are the same as those we use for stereoanalysis of a wide range of planetary datasets [8].  We use the USGS in-house digital cartographic software ISIS [9,10,11] for mission-specific data ingestion and calibration steps, as well as "twodimensional" processing such as map-projection and image mosaicking.  Photoclinometry [4] and slope analysis are also performed with (unreleased) programs that read ISIS image files.  Our commercial digital photogrammetric workstation, an LH Systems DPW-790 running SOCET SET ® BAE Sytems software [12,13], includes special hardware for stereo display of images and graphics, and is used for "three-dimensional" processing steps such as measurement of image tiepoints; bundle-block adjustment of image orientations to conform to geodetic control; and automatic extraction and manual editing of DEMs.  SOCET SET includes a pushbroom scanner sensor model that is physically realistic but "generic" enough to describe most MOC-NA (and WA) images.  The main limitation of this model is that only low-order corrections to the a priori  spacecraft information (3-axis offset and velocity relative to a specified trajectory; 3-axis angular bias, velocity, and acceleration relative to nadirfixed pointing) are possible.  Least-squares adjustment of these parameters based on measurements of 10-15 corresponding points in the two images provides the relative control of the images needed for stereomatching. Constraining the points to elevations interpolated from MOLA data provides absolute vertical control.  We have not attempted to improve the absolute horizontal control, because the a priori positions are already consistent with the MOLA data given the limited horizontal resolution of the latter. In any case, absolute horizontal positioning is not needed for slope analyses. Unfortunately, most of the MOC pairs we have examined show evidence of high-frequency (1 to 10 Hz) spacecraft oscillations that can interfere with DEM extraction and are impossible to fix by fitting low-order pointing corrections.  These oscillations are also visible in the spacecraft pointing data (SPICE CK file) where they are aliased to frequencies lower than 0.25 Hz and hence cannot be used to correct the images.  The amplitude of oscillation is variable but can be many image pixels.  Across-track (roll) oscillations cause parallax that is misinterpreted by the stereomatcher (and the eye) as topography, but because the resulting topographic artifacts are constant across the width of the DEM they can be removed or at least suppressed by digital filtering.  Along-track (pitch) errors are more troublesome because they move corresponding features to different lines in the two images, which can cause automatic stereomatching to fail entirely.  Where pitch oscillations were severe, we segmented the images, aligned each segment along-track before DEM extraction, and then merged the resulting DEM segments.  Development of bundle adjustment software incorporating high-frequency oscillations would avoid the need for such time consuming ad hoc fixes. The two-dimensional photoclinometry algorithm of Kirk [4] was used to construct DEMs of selected image regions with single-pixel resolution.  The quantitative accuracy of these DEMs depends crucially on the validity of assumptions made about the surface scattering law and atmospheric optical depth [14].  While the surface photometry of Mars is adequately constrained [15], the atmospheric haze contribution to any given image is essentially an unknown; misestimating this haze level leads to errors in the overall scale of topography (and slopes).  We therefore calibrate the photoclinometric analysis by choosing a haze estimate that gives results consistent with stereoanalysis.  MOLA data can also be used for this calibration [16,17] but work best when the illumination direction is along the MOLA profile and significant slopes on baselines of hundreds of meters are present.  The equatorial MER sites do not satisfy either of these conditions.  To carry out the calibration, a simulated image was first calculated from part of the stereo DEM chosen for maximum resolved relief and minimum albedo variations, using the appropriate surface photometric function [17].  Linear regression of the real  ROUGHNESS OF MER LANDING SITES FROM MOC-NA: R. L. Kirk et al. image of the same area on the simulated image then yielded both the atmospheric haze correction (intercept of fit) and albedo normalization (slope of fit) needed as inputs for photoclinometry. The image region used for photoclinometry generally differed from that used for fitting, being chosen to contain minimal albedo variations but a full range of typical relief rather than maximum relief.  Despite the selection of image areas with little or no visible albedo variations, it was usually necessary to filter the DEMs to suppress albedo-related artifacts in the form of ridges and troughs aligned with the sun direction.  Comparison between the DEMs and slope estimates from stereo and photoclinometry (as well as MOLA and, where available, lander images) provides a useful check on the calibration process. Roughness Analysis:  We use two complementary approaches to investigate the roughness properties of the candidate landing sites once DEMs are available.  The first is simple:  slopes are calculated explicitly from the differences between elevation values at separate points in the DEM.  This yields not only summary statistics such as root-mean-squared (RMS) and quantile slopes, but the entire slope probability distribution and even maps of the spatial distribution of slopes, if desired.  In addition, both bidirectional slopes (along a given direction, typically east-west or north-south) and adirectional slopes (maximum slope in any direction, also called the dip or gradient) can be assessed.  The main drawback is that a separate calculation is needed to describe slopes for each horizontal baseline.  We therefore also use Fourier transform techniques to calculate the RMS bidirectional slope for a complete range of baselines simultaneously. This approach lets us compare results from datasets of different resolutions and interpolate or even extrapolate to a desired baseline. Results:  Explicit calculation of slopes over a one-post baseline indicates that the shape of the slope probability distribution is qualitatively similar at all the sites studied.  Slope probability distributions are significantly "long tailed", i.e., extreme slopes are more common than would be expected for a normal distribution with the same RMS slope value.  Slopes over these short baselines are also nearly isotropic; although the artifacts due to spacecraft pointing errors may affect the stereo DEMs over longer baselines, they do not significantly bias the along-track slopes compared to those acrosstrack at the limit of resolution.  Although there is no necessary reason why the shape of the slope distribution should be independent of baseline, the agreement in ratios of, e.g., 99th %ile slope to RMS slope for both stereo and photoclinometric DEMs of all sites gives us confidence in using the curves of RMS slope versus baseline from Fourier analysis to correct percentile slopes to the 5-m baseline relevant to MER safety. The relation between slope and baseline contains both information about the surface and artifacts relating to the input data and processing; for example, the slope tends to a constant at baselines less than the true resolution of the data or the size of the smallest topographic features, whichever is less.  At slightly larger baselines, a power law relation between slope and baseline is common, and can be interpreted in terms of fractal geometry [18].  The power law relation commonly breaks down for baselines approaching the width of the DEM, regardless of the intrinsic surface properties. Fractal dimensions D computed from our DEMs are typically 2.3-2.5.  MOC, Viking, and IMP data for the Pathfinder site agree in both fractal dimension and slope over more than 5 orders of magnitude, so that a straight-line extrapolation of the Viking photoclinometry curve from baselines ≥80 m yields slopes at centimeter scales that are within a factor of two of those measured in situ [8]. MOLA data at even longer baselines are also in good agreement [Oded Aharanson, personal communication, 2001], giving us even greater confidence in the consistency of our results. The single striking exception to power-law roughness scaling is the Melas site.  The stereo DEM is essentially devoid of roughness elements smaller than ~300 m and appears very smooth at 10 m (Table 1).  It is clear from the images and the photoclinometry DEM, however, that the stereomatcher just misses resolving the numerous (and very steep) dunes.  Resolved by photoclinometry, these features have RMS slopes ≥10° at 10 m baseline.  We were able to confirm that these slopes are real and not an artifact caused by strong albedo variations on the dunes by interactively making spot height measurements on the highly magnified stereopair. Conclusion:  All of the sites studied with MOC images have roughness statistics greatly exceeding the MER safety criterion. Even if the criterion were relaxed to admit the Pathfinder site (on the basis that landing there with the same technology intended for MER was successful), the remaining sites are too rough by a factor of 1.5-2.  One possible conclusion from this severe mismatch of requirement and reality is that the engineering safety criterion is overly conservative and may need to be relaxed.  This could entail accepting larger slope values or higher probabilities, or considering slopes on longer baselines.  As mission planners ponder this issue, we will continue to analyze new images and stereopairs of the landing ellipses to ensure that we have the most representative sampling possible of the roughness conditions the landers are likely to encounter. The newly developed software and techniques reported here are opening a door to a new realm of Mars topography.  The ability to produce DEMs with horizontal resolutions of 10 m and better is essential for selecting future landing sites and can also be expected to contribute greatly to the study of surface processes.  These capabilities will be almost immediately applicable to high-resolution stereoimagery from future missions such as Mars Express and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, as well. References: [1] Malin, M. C., et al (1992) JGR, 97, 7699; Malin, M. C., et al. (1998) Science, 279, 1681. [2] Zuber, M. T., et al. (1992) JGR, 97, 7781-7797; Smith, D. E., et al. (1999) Science, 284, 1495-1503. [3] Kirk, R. L., et al., (1999) LPS XXX, 1857. [4] Kirk, R. L. (1987), III. A fast finite-element algorithm for two-dimensional photoclinometry, Ph.D. Thesis (unpubl.), Caltech. [5] HowingtonKraus, E., et al. (1995) In: Mars Pathfinder Landing Site Workshop II, LPI Tech. Rep. 95-01, 38-39; map reproduced in Tanaka, K. L. (1997) JGR, 102, 4131-4149.  [6] Kirk, R. L., et al. (1999) JGR, 104(E4), 8869-8887. [7] Kirk, R. L., et al. (2001) ISPRS-ET Workshop "Planetary Mapping 2001," online at wwwflag.wr.usgs.gov /USGSFlag/Space/Isprs/Flagstaff2001/abstracts/isprs_etm_OCT01_ kirk_mars_moc_stereo.pdf. [8] Kirk, R. L., et al. (2000) Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens., XXXIII(B4), 476 (CD-ROM).  [9] Eliason, E. (1997) LPS XXVIII, 331-332. [10] Gaddis, L. et al. (1997) LPS XXVIII, 387-388. [11] Torson, J. and Becker, K. (1997) LPS XXVIII, 1443-1444. [12] Miller, S. B. and Walker, A. S. (1993) ACSM/ASPRS Annual Convention and Exposition Technical Papers, 3, 256-263. [13] Miller, S. B. and Walker, A. S. (1995) Z. Photogramm. Fernerkundung, 1/95, 4-16. [14] Kirk, R. L., et al., (2001) LPS XXXII, 1874. [15] Kirk, R. L., et al. (2000) LPS XXXI, 2025. [16] Herkenhoff, K. E., et al. (1999) LPS XXX, 1120 [17] Soderblom, L. A., et al. (2002) this conference. [18] Turcotte, D. L. (1997) Fractals and Chaos in Geology and Geophysics , Cambridge Univ. Press, New York.. Table 1. MOC Stereopairs of MER Landing Sites & Roughness Statistics Site Image 1 Image 2 Lon (°) Lat (°) Res (m) GSD (m) c.a. (°) EP (m) RMS Slope MER Slope P(15°) %Pathfinder SP1-23703 SP1-25603 33.5 19.3 3.2 10 24.6 1.2 4.2 20.4 3.6 Melas Chasma E02-00270 E05-01626 77.8 -8.8 2.9 9 12.6 2.7 2.4 38.2 28.9 Gusev Crater E02-00665 E02-01453 184.1 -14.9 3.3 10 21.9 1.6 2.8-5.6 15.0-32.0 1.0-16.3 Isidis Planitia E02-01301 E02-02016 275.2 4.6 3.1 9 12.8 2.7 5.7 27.0 2.9 Eos Chasma E02-02855 E04-02855 41.5 -13.5 4.3 13 21.7 2.2 6.3 37.6 7.2 Lon and Lat are approximate west longitude, planetocentric latitude at center of model. Res is the coarser of the two image resolutions. GSD is minimum achievable ground sample distance for DEM, given as 3 times Res.  c.a. is convergence angle.  EP is expected vertical precision, equal to 0.2 Res / tan(c.a.).  RMS Slope is bidirectional, from stereo DEM on 10 m baseline.  MER Slope is 99th % ile adirectional slope at 5 m baseline; mission safety limit for this type of slope is 15°.  P(15°) is percent probability of encountering ≥15° slope on 5-m baseline.  Two slope values given for Gusev are inside, outside 22-km crater. 
