 SIMULATIONS OF EXPECTED GAMMA RAY FLUXES FROM MARS.  J. Masarik1, J. Brueckner2, and R. C. Reedy3, 1Dept. of Nuclear Physics, Komensky University, Mlynska dolina F/1, Sk-84248 Bratislava, Slovakia, (e-mail: masarik@fmph.uniba.sk), 2Max-Planck-Institut fuer Chemie, P.O. Box 3060, D-55020 Mainz, Germany, 3Space and Remote Sensing Science Group, Mail Stop D436, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA. Summary:  The fluxes of cosmic-ray-produced gamma rays escaping from the martian surface were calculated for various expected chemical compositions corresponding to particular SNC meteorites, 8 water contents and 6 thicknesses of the atmosphere. All of these varying parameters strongly affect the fluxes of gamma rays escaping from Mars. Introduction:  The top of the martian atmosphere is bombarded by cosmic rays. The resulting interactions of the primary and secondary particles with matter are the main sources of gamma rays. Discrete-energy γ rays are produced by typical reactions inside the surface, such as (n,nγ) inelastic reactions and (n,γ) capture reactions of fast and thermal secondary neutrons, respectively [1]. These γ rays, which carry information about the nucleus that emitted them, are diagnostic for the composition of the surface material and can be used as an analytical tool. Their specific energies are used for the identification of the emitting nuclei, i.e., the element present in the surface, while their intensities reflect the concentration of the elements. So qualitative and quantitative remote analysis of the asteroid surface is possible using an appropriate gamma-ray detector carried on board an orbiting spacecraft [2]. One of the primary objectives of the NASA Mars Odyssey mission is to obtain global elemental composition maps of the martian surface, confirm the presence of ices in polar region, and reveal some other possible unknown features. The γ-ray fluxes reported here were calculated for the inversion of measured γ-ray fluxes to elemental composition. Methods:  Galactic cosmic rays are nuclear particles, mainly protons and helium nuclei, with a very broad range in energy but typically of the order of 1 GeV. In the interactions of particles with such energies, a cascade of secondary particles is produced. Their number and kinematic parameters are dependent on the energy of the primary particles and the chemical composition of the irradiated body [3]. The cascade particles most effective in generating γ rays are neutrons. The high-energy neutrons produced during the cascade development can undergo further nuclear collisions. They may excite stable nuclei to higher levels by inelastic or nonelastic scattering reactions. They also may lose energy until they escape into space or are thermalized and captured. The inelastic reactions usually have large cross sections for all major elements at energies above the reaction threshold. Thermal neutron capture cross sections are highly variable. For example, they are negligible for oxygen, very small for carbon, large for hydrogen, chlorine and iron, and very large for some trace elements like gadolinium. The huge energy range of the particles that participate in reactions leading to γ-ray production requires a very complex nuclear model for the simulation of relevant processes. Our calculations are based on the Los Alamos LAHET Code System (LCS) [4,5], which is a system of general-purpose, Monte Carlo computer codes that treat the relevant physical processes of particle production and transport.  This code system and its application to planetary problems are in more detail discussed in [3,6]. An isotropic GCR irradiation by 4.56 protons/cm2/s, corresponding to the GCR primary particle spectrum averaged over a typical solar cycle, of a sphere with a radius of real Mars was simulated. The determination of the chemical composition of the martian surface is the subject of investigations by the Mars Odyssey gamma ray spectrometer. Therefore, in our simulations the surface composition was varied in order to cover a wide range of expected possibilities. The martian surface was divided into concentric shells, with many shells near surface and fewer shells at greater depths.  The neutron flux was calculated for each shell. Having calculated the neutron fluxes, the production rate Pj of γ ray j at depth r is calculated with Pj (r) = Ni i∑ σ ijk 0∞ ∫ (Ek )⋅ J k(Ek ,r)dEk where Ni is the number of atoms for target element i per kg material in the irradiated body, σijk is the cross section for the production of γ ray j from target element i by particle of type k  with energy Ek, and Jk(Ek,r) is total flux of particles of type k with energy Ek inside the irradiated body. Measured or evaluated cross sections are used for inelastic or spallation reactions. We are not here concerned with scattered gamma rays, which contribute to the continuum only, but only with the gamma rays that undergo no interactions before they escape from the surface. Therefore, having calculated production rates Pj(r)  of gamma ray j at each reasonable distance r from center of the Mars, we calculated the flux of gamma rays at an isotropic detector on the martian surface accounting for the attenuation of gamma ray between the location of their creation and the detector position. Fluxes at a detector flown on board a spacecraft can be obtained from these surface fluxes by applying simple corrections for geometrical acceptance.  γ-RAY FLUXES FROM MARS:  J. Masarik et al., Discussion:  The investigated martian compositions included Chassigny, Nakhla, Shergotty, ALH77005, the average martian soil, and the Mars Pathfinder soil-free rock. To study the dependence on major elements influencing the gamma-ray production and transport processes, we produced also artificially mixed compositions from these naturally-observed ones. Neutron transport and gamma-ray production simulations for these chemical compositions were selected to show the importance of a detailed knowledge of the processes relevant for the interpretation of obtained experimental data. In the case of a completely dry surface, scattering properties are determined mainly by O, Si, and Fe. In the case of even a very small admixture of water in the composition, hydrogen plays the most important role in the slowing down of secondary neutrons.  More H results in an enhanced thermal neutron flux and a shallower peaking of that flux. Hydrogen and certain other elements, like iron and chlorine, strongly absorb thermal neutrons, and increases in their concentrations depress the thermal neutron flux. O and Si are significant because of their high abundances in the most of the investigated chemistries.  Fe is important because it varies substantially in the explored compositions and because it influences the particle production and absorption processes in the martian surface [3]. Variations in total fluxes and shifts of neutron fluxes in the martian surface are also calculated for increased atmosphere thickness. In the case of γ-ray lines produced by inelastic nuclear reactions, their flux is within the errors of calculations proportional to the content of the target element in the martian surface (Fig. 1). Fig. 1 Flux at the dry martian surface of the 0.8467 MeV γ  ray made by the 56Fe(n,nγ)56Fe reaction. The martian atmosphere was 15 g/cm2thick. The influence of varying compositions on fluxes of gamma rays made by neutron capture reactions is demonstrated in Fig. 2 for the 7631 keV γ-ray made by the 56Fe(n,γ)56Fe reaction. Besides the varying Fe content, the second element that most influences the shape of the obtained dependence is chlorine. It has a high cross section for thermal neutron absorption and its content varies very much in the investigated compositions. Fig. 2 Flux at the dry martian surface of the 7.631 MeV γ ray made by the 56Fe(n,γ)56Fe neutron capture reaction. The martian atmosphere was 15 g/cm2thick. Using the calculated fluxes of γ rays, the calibration curves for the inversion of measured fluxes into chemical composition can be constructed.  In the case of γ rays produced in neutron-capture reactions, the dependence on concentration is less linear than in the case of γ rays produced via inelastic nuclear reactions. Both dependencies can be fitted by polynomials of higher degree. Conclusions:  Our simulations of the intensities of γ rays produced by the interactions of galactic cosmic rays with the martian atmosphere and surface show that the analyses of γ-ray spectra obtained from a martian surface is possible but require a detailed knowledge of the γ-ray production and transport processes. References:  [1] Evans L. G. et al. (1993) in: Remote Geochemical Analysis, Cambridge Press, p. 167.  [2] Brückner J. and J. Masarik (1997) Planet. Space Sci. 45, 39.  [3] Masarik J. and Reedy R. C. (1994) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 58, 5307.  [4] Prael R. E. and Lichtenstein H. (1989) Los Alamos Report LA-UR-89-3014.  [5] Briesmeister J.F. ed. (1993) Los Alamos Report LA12625-M.  [6] Masarik J. and Reedy R.C. (1996)  J. Geophys. Res. 101, 18,891. 22.5 33.5 412 14 16 18 20 22 FE, E = 0.8467 MeV Ga mm a R ay F lu x [c m-2 s1 ]Weight % Soil Free Rock Mix 4 Mix 3 Mix 2 ALH 77005 Mix 1 Chassigny 0.8 11.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 212 14 16 18 20 22 Fe,  E =7.6311 MeV Gam ma R ay F lu x [c m-2 s1 ] Weight % Soil Free Rock Mix 4 Mix 3 Mix 2 ALH 77005 Mix 1 Chassigny 
