 THEORY OF GROUND ICE ON MARS AND IMPLICATIONS TO THE NEUTRON LEAKAGE FLUX.  M. T. Mellon, Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, 80309-0392, USA.    Introduction:  Near-surface ground ice (subsurface ice in the upper several meters of the surface) is an important component of the global cycles of water and the behavior of the martian climate. It represents a substantial reservoir of water that can dynamically exchange with the atmosphere on timescales comparable to that of oscillations in the planet's orbit [Mellon and Jakosky, 1995]. As the martian obliquity increases or decreases, the global atmospheric humidity also increases or deceases. In response to this and changes in the regolith temperatures, ground ice can undergo cycles of sublimation and condensation, such that the upper meter or two of the martian regolith can become alternately ice-saturated and desiccated. The rate of sublimation and condensation is fast enough to respond to orbital changes, but slow enough that the distribution of ice in one year may not reflect the climate conditions of that year, but instead an average over the previous thousand or so years. Therefore, the present day distribution of ground ice reflects some measure of the longer-term martian climate.  In this work we present new calculations of the geographic and depth distribution of ground ice on Mars and draw comparisons with the inferred distribution of ice from Mars Odyssey Neutron Spectrometer observations.  Theory and Observations: Numerous previous studies have predicted the stability of ground ice in the regolith of Mars poleward of about 40o to 50o latitude [e.g., Leighton and Murray, 1966; Farmer and Doms, 1979; Fanale et al., 1986; Mellon and Jakosky, 1995]. The stability of ground ice in these regions is based on both 1) the thermodynamic behavior of the regolith and 2) the diffusive exchange of water vapor between the regolith pore space and the martian atmosphere.  In general, ground ice is stable geographically where the mean annual ground-surface temperatures are lower than the mean annual atmospheric frost point (the temperature at which water vapor will begin to condense). The depth at which ground ice is stable (also called the ice table) is the depth where the mean water-vapor concentration with respect to ice in the pore space equals that of the atmosphere. If an imbalance were to occur (such as dry soil at temperatures below the frost point) a flux of water vapor will occur and condensation of ice will fill the regolith voids. Above the ice table is ice-free soil and below the ice table the soil will become densely ice saturated, similar to the configuration of ground ice found in the Antarctic Dry Valleys. All that is required is that the regolith be porous and in diffusive contact with the atmosphere. The only source of water is the atmosphere.  Recent observations of the martian neutron leakage flux by the Neutron Spectrometer onboard the Mars Odyssey spacecraft [Boynton et al., 2002; Feldman et al., 2002] indicate the presence of substantial subsurface hydrogen in the southern high latitudes and polar regions of Mars, poleward of about 50o to 60o South latitude. The best explanation for the presence of this hydrogen is that deposits of ground ice occur in the upper meter of the regolith at depths of a few tens of centimeters beneath ice-free soil. Generally speaking, ice buried deeper than about 100 g/cm2 of ice-free soil is not observable.  Distribution of Ground Ice:  In this work we have revised the models of ground ice stability to account for 1) the thermal conductivity of ice-cemented soil, 2) the effects of surface elevation on the atmospheric humidity, and 3) new observations of thermal inertia of the martian surface. With these revised models we have mapped the theoretical distribution of ground ice as it relates to the martian climate. The thermal conductivity of the regolith is altered by the presence of ice in the soil pore space. Even small amounts of ice will dramatically increase the bulk thermal conductivity [Mellon et al., 1997]. This increase causes heat to be more efficiently wicked from the near surface and allows ground ice to be stable closer to the surface [Paige, 1992].  Surface elevation affects ground-ice stability by its roll in the absolute atmospheric humidity. The concentration of water vapor in the near-surface atmosphere is an important boundary condition to ground-ice stability, as it controls the diffusive flux of water in and out of the regolith. At lower elevations the atmospheric pressure, density, and absolute humidity will increase and ground ice is more likely to be stable. Thermal inertia is a key property that controls the surface and subsurface temperatures which drive the transport of water vapor. It has been previously inferred from Viking and more recently from Mars Global Surveyor observations of the planet's surface temperature. While the large-scale global patterns of thermal inertia remain the same, the higher resolution MGS results exhibit a wider range of extremes in inertia values within a small region. This range will result in a wider range of ice-table depths.  Applying these concepts we have mapped the geographic distribution of ground ice and depth distribution of the ice table for a variety of atmospheric hu GROUND ICE ON MARS:  M. T. Mellon  midity conditions. Results are shown in Figure 1 for the case of a mean annual atmospheric water column of 10 pr um, distributed uniformly with CO2.  The geographic distribution of the neutron energy spectrum is consistent with a presence of ground ice as shown in Figure 1. However, ground-ice maps derived using 100 pr um or 1 pr um of atmospheric water are not consistent with the neutron distribution. Ultimately, limits can be placed on the longer-term atmospheric water content through a careful comparison of these results with the neutron data. The depths of the ice table given by this model are generally on the order of a few centimeters, significantly shallower than previous model predictions and shallower than those inferred from the neutron data (on the order of a few tens of centimeters [Boynton et al., 2002]).  Reconciling this difference requires consideration of the nature of the martian surface and the departure from an ideal surface. The Real Martian Surface: Models used to predict the distribution and behavior of ground ice and those used to interpret the neutron data assume a homogeneous, flat soil surface on Mars. However, the martian surface as seen from the Pathfinder and Viking landers is covered by a combination of rocks, bedrock, and soil in varying degrees. These surfaces also exhibit a range of slopes (hills and troughs).  The relationship between neutron-leakage spectra and the ice-table depth is quite nonlinear. To best compare neutron observations with predicted groundice depth, integration is needed of the neutron flux over the ice-table depth distribution within the field of view. The presence of rocks and bedrock can have a number of effects on the apparent depth of ground ice. Rock possesses little porosity relative to soil and therefore would contain little ice. A rock at the surface can increase the apparent depth of ground ice by increasing the column mass of ice-free and hydrogen-poor material above the ice table. Rocks, having a high thermal conductivity can also affect the ground thermal regime and can increase the depth of the ice table. Bedrock will appear as ice-free zones. The integrated effect over the Neutron Spectrometer's field of view is that, while ground ice may be stable close to the surface for bare soil, the "average" depth will appear deeper. Surface slopes can also affect the apparent depth distribution of ground ice in similar ways. Relative to a level surface, for slopes facing poleward, ground ice will be stable closer to the surface, and for slopes facing equatorward ground ice will be stable at greater depths. If a surface exhibits an even distribution of slopes, the integration of the nonlinear effects of the depth of the ice table will result in a deeper apparent depth relative to a uniformly level surface.  Figure 1.  The depth of the ice table (in the top 1 m), assuming an annual mean of 10 pr um of atmospheric water vapor distributed with a 10.8 km scale height. Poleward of about 60o south most depths are between 1 and 10 cm.  
