 ANALOGS OF MARTIAN SURFACE COMPONENTS:  DISTINGUISHING IMPACT GLASS FROM VOLCANIC GLASS.  B. J. Thomson and P. H. Schultz, Brown University, Department of Geology, 324 Brook St., Box 1846, Providence, RI 02912, Bradley_Thomson@brown.edu. Introduction:  Future Mars sample return missions will obtain radiometric ages of surface units in order to calibrate the relative Martian time scale.  Martian geologic units are currently assigned relative ages based on the observed densities of impact craters. Ideal samples for calibration would be from regionally extensive terrains that possess well-defined formation ages, e.g., volcanic plains.  The problem confronting a rover visiting such a terrain is that exposures of bedrock may be absent or rare, thereby necessitating sampling of loose material (float).  While a local origin of such material may be assumed, the exact mode of origin may be unclear.  Rocks on the surface of Mars may be blocks of volcanic glass from impact-disrupted lava flows, or may be impact glasses composed of fused local materials [1].  The ages obtained by dating a sample of impact glass would likely reflect the age of the impact rather than the age of the unit in which it lies, thus complicating the calibration of the cratering time scale. Thus it is important to be able to distinguish impact from volcanic glasses before they are brought back to the lab.  In the absence of in-situ petrographic analysis, an analysis of the surface texture of blocks from which samples are obtained may provide some insight into their origin due to the different formation mechanisms of impact and volcanic glasses.  In this study we explore possible discriminatory methods based on rock texture. Expected differences in vesiculation between volcanic and impact glasses:  Field observations of terrestrial lava flows indicate that the vesicles are typically concentrated into upper and lower vesicular zones, with a relatively vesicle-poor zone in between [2].  Vesicles are commonly spherical or oblate near the top of the upper vesicular zone.  Pressure from rising bubbles below may induce uniaxial deformation of the bubbles, which results in oblate spheroids whose short axes are all aligned in a common plane (perpendicular to the surface). In contrast to the static, quiescent conditions experienced by a cooling lava flow, melts generated by impact experience a chaotic, dynamic emplacement process.  Melt is generated both by material subjected to high shock pressures and also by dynamic shear due to grain-to-grain contacts.  Since material flow lines cut across isobars, the material ejected from an impact crater is a mix of highly shocked and weakly shocked material.  Inside a crater, retained melts may form a self-insular mass whose cooling history may parallel that of a large lava flow or sill.  Outside the crater, individual melt breccias cool rapidly enough to preserve the disequilibruim conditions they experienced during their emplacement. Impact melt breccias commonly contain highpressure, high-temperature mineral polymorphs, schlieren (plus other evidence of flow), as well as highly strained and distorted vesicles.  Examples of such impact melt breccias have been well documented in the Argentine loess, where the surrounding loess deposits served to soft-capture these melt products [e.g., 3,4]. Expected Martian rocks:  Substantial quantities of both volcanic glasses and impact glasses are likely present on the Martian surface [1,5,6].  At the Viking and Pathfinder sites both the regional geology and the observed characteristics of local rocks are consistent with the presence of glass. Regional geology of the landing sites:  All three landing sites are located on the relatively smooth northern lowlands of Mars.  Topographic data has revealed the presence of numerous ridges throughout the northern plains that suggest a lava plains substrate [7,8] overlain by a veneer of sedimentary material [8]. The rocks observed at the landing sites, being primarily locally derived [9], are likely either fragments of possible lava plains disrupted by impacts [10], or glassy impact melt rocks [1]. Characteristics of martian rocks: Observed landscapes at the three landing sites appear dominated by dark rocks and cobbles amidst drifts of bright, finegrained material.  No phenocrysts were observed in any images of the rocks, and most rocks exhibit pitted or vesicular surfaces [e.g., 9-11].  Many also possess conchoidal fractures that are consistent with a glassy composition. There have been many suggestions for the origin of the surface texture of the rocks.  Possibilities for the origin of the pits can be grouped into two categories: a) primary features such as vesicles [e.g., 10]; or b) secondary erosional features [e.g., 12,13].  Although all of the moats and wind tails that surround some rocks share a common orientation, the pits and vesicles do not [13].  This, coupled with the fact that all rocks are not pitted to the same degree, suggests that many of the rocks possess a primary vesicular texture.  However, enhancement or modification of the vesicles through eolian abrasion is possible and cannot be ruled out.  ORIGIN OF MARTIAN VESICLES:  B. J. Thomson and P. H. Schultz Results - Observed differences in vesiculation: Figures 1a and 1b show images of small hand samples of the vesicular upper surface of an obsidian flow from Valles Caldera, New Mexico and a impact melt bomb from the Argentine loess, respectively.  Note the in the volcanic sample (Figure 1a), the vesicles are concentrated in the right side of the sample (the upper flow surface in its original orientation).  Most vesicles are slightly oblate, with a mean vesicle aspect ratio of about ~1.3.  Although not shown here, volcanic vesicles tend to become more equidimensional with depth [2]. The rose diagram of the orientation of the long axes of the vesicles shows a preferred orientation parallel to the original flow surface. The impact glass, in contrast, has vesicles with a greater spread of orientations.  This is best seen in the x-y histograms directly below the rose diagrams in Figure 1a and 1b.  The peak of the distribution in the impact glass covers 70° of azimuth, while the volcanic peak distribution covers 40° of azimuth.  In addition to a less coherent fabric, individual vesicles have a larger average aspect ratio of ~1.8.  A comparison of the distribution of the aspect ratios is given in Figure 1c, and it is evident that impact vesicles tend to be more elongate. Implications for Mars:  The results of this preliminary analyses of vesicular terrestrial volcanic and impact glasses suggest that the two types of glass may be distinguished based on their texture.  Further analyses of a larger suite of samples are necessary to draw definitive conclusions, especially with regards to variation in rock composition and volatile content. Once a suitable suite of samples has been analyzed, a careful examination of the observed vesicles on blocks at the landing sites may help elucidate their origin prior to sampling. References: [1] Schultz P. H. and Mustard J. F. (1998) LPSC XXIX, Abstract #1847.  [2] Aubele J. C. et al. (1988) J. Vol. Geotherm. Res., 35, 349-374.  [3] Schultz P. H. et al. (1994) Geology, 22, 889-892.  [4] Schultz P. H. et al. (1998) Science, 282, 2061-2063.  [5] Schultz P. H. and Mustard J. F. (2001) LPSC XXXII, Abstract #1668.  [6] Bouska V. and Bell J. F. III (1993) JGR, 98, 18,719-18,725.  [7] Withers P. and Neumann G. A. (2001) Nature, 410,  651.  [8] Thomson B. J. and Head J. W. III (2001) JGR, 106, 23,209-23,230. [9] McSween H. Y. Jr. (1999) JGR, 104, 8679-8715. [10] Mutch T. A. et al. (1977) JGR, 82, 4452-4467.  [11] Binder A. B. et al. (1977) JGR, 82, 4439-4451. [12] McCauley J. F. et al. (1979) JGR, 84, 8222-8232.  [13] Greeley R. et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 8573-8584. Figure 1a:  Image of hand sample of a vesicular flow from Valles Caldera, 7.7 cm in length.  Rose diagram shows distribution of the azimuths of the long axes of individual vesicles.  The histogram shows the same data as the rose diagram.  Figure 1b:   Image of hand sample of small impact melt bomb from Argentina (3.5 cm in length).  Rose diagram and histogram are in the same format as Figure 1a.  Figure 1c:  Comparison of the distribution of aspect ratios of vesicles in the two samples in Figures 1a and 1b. 
