 THE DISTRIBUTION OF NON-VOLATILE ELEMENTS ON MARS: MARS ODYSSEY GRS RESULTS. W. Boynton1, D. Janes1, K. Kerry1, K. Kim2, R. Reedy2, L. Evans3, R. Starr3, D. Drake4, J. Taylor5, H. Wänke6, and C. d'Uston7, 1Univ. Arizona, 2Univ. New Mexico, 3Goddard, 4TechSource, 5Univ. Hawaii, 6MPI-Mainz, 7CESR. Introduction:  The major scientific objective of the Gamma-Ray Spectrometer (GRS) [1] on the 2001 Mars Odyssey Mission is to determine the distribution of elements in the near-surface of Mars. Mars Odyssey has been in its mapping orbit since February, 2002, and the GRS boom, which removes the instrument from the gamma-ray background of the spacecraft, was erected in June, 2002. In the 580 days since boom erection, we have accumulated 453 days of mapping data. The difference is due mostly to two times when Odyssey went into safe mode and the instrument warmed up forcing us to anneal out radiation damage that manifests itself after warming. Other data losses are due to simple transmitter data gaps and to intense solar particle events. The data from the GRS is statistical in nature. We have a very low count rate and a very low signal-tonoise ratio. With the exception of K, the most easily mapped elements have a signal/noise ratio on the order of 0.1 (0.5 for K) and the counting rates are on the order of 0.3 to 0.7 counts/min (4 cpm for K). In order to map the distribution of an element, we have to divide the total signal from Mars up into many cells that define the map's spatial resolution (unless the statistics are good enough that the intrinsic spatial resolution of the instrument, about 550 km diameter, dominates). The data for several elements have now achieved a statistical precision that permits us to make meaningful maps. It has taken a long time to get to this point because Mars is characterized by relatively small contrast in abundances. With the exception of H, we generally see a variation of less than a factor of two, unlike on the moon where elemental abundances vary by over a factor of 10 [2]. Probably our most challenging case is for Si, where the total variation is only +/- 12% (relative). Data Processing:  In our early work [3], the data derived from gamma rays produced by neutron capture reactions were corrected based on the observed flux of thermal neutrons measured by the neutron spectrometer component of the GRS. The thermal neutrons in the near surface, generally the upper 20 cm, are the excitation source for the capture-produced gamma rays. By modeling the distribution of thermal neutrons with depth, we have subsequently found that the neutron flux in orbit does not always vary in proportion to the neutron flux in the near-surface for different regolith compositions. In this work we examine alternate means of adjusting the derived elemental abundances for several elements that are determined via neutron capture reactions. This correction is necessary because elements with a significant neutron capture cross section will change the distribution of neutrons in the near-surface. For these elements, Fe, Cl, and Si, we attempted to make corrections based on Monte Carlo models of the neutron distribution with depth as a function of regolith composition. We used the Monte Carlo code MCNPX [4] and examined a range in variation of each of these elements from our nominal model composition that is similar to that found at the Mars Pathfinder landing site [5] adjusted for a 3% H2O content. For computational simplicity, we assumed the variation in flux observed from a variation of each of these elements separately would be the same in a mixed sample with variation in all elements. This simplification is clearly not appropriate where the resultant composition is very different from the model composition. For example, a change in the Cl content from the nominal 0.55% to 1.1% resulted in an adjustment of a factor of 1.46, i.e. the observed Cl would be low by this factor and would need to be corrected up to give the appropriate true concentration. The reason for such a large increase is that the large change in the Cl content has a significant effect on the total macroscopic neutron capture cross section (the weighted sum of the cross section of all elements) of the bulk soil. On the other hand, if the same variation in Cl content were modeled on a soil that had much more Fe than the nominal soil, the change in Cl would have a smaller relative effect on the total macroscopic capture cross section. At this time we do not have the necessary model runs made examine this second-order effect. An alternate method of correction was also examined. This result relies on the fact that the flux of gamma-rays produced by neutron capture is proportional to the amount of the element and the flux of thermal neutrons in the near-surface. If we are only interested in element ratios, we can determine these directly from the ratio of gamma-ray fluxes of the two elements. Since Si is not expected to vary much over the planet, we can use Fe/Si ratios as a fair proxy for Fe concentration with a suitable normalization. We can do better than this however, because we can determine Si via two distinct methods, one via thermal-neutron capture, and the other by fast-neutron inelastic scatter. The fast neutrons are easier to model and we feel more confident that we can determine the Si content to reasonable precision based on the fast-neutron interaction.  Results:  The results are shown in figure 1. For the capture lines we used the last method described above as it gave the most reasonable results. When the Si capture line was corrected based on thermal neutrons measured in orbit, it showed a +/- 25% variation. When the Si capture line was corrected via the computational approach, based on the modeled effect of the influence of each element's abundance on the neutron flux distribution, it showed a variation of +/- 30%. The Si determined via inelastic scatter, on the other hand, showed a variation of only +/- 12%. This is more in line with expectations based on Viking and Pathfinder analyses. The maps shown are generated as follows: Si, Cl, and Fe abundances are normalized to those observed by the APXS on Mars Pathfinder [5]; K and Th, which are based on radioactive elements, are determined without normalization. In order to reduce the statistical noise, the maps have been smoothed with a box-car filter. The size of the filter is 10 degrees of arc radius (590 km) for all elements except K (5 deg) and Th (15 deg). The intrinsic spatial resolution of the GRS varies somewhat with energy, but is on the order of 4.5 degrees radius [1]. Contour lines are 5 km. Si. Si is determined via the inelastic scatter line and is normalized to the orbital fast-neutron flux. It shows a modest enrichment in the north. Some of this enrichment could be due to the postulated enrichment of andesite in the surface type-2 region of Bandfield et al. [6] Fe. Fe shows a modest enrichment in the north. In the northeast, the enrichment follows the 0-km elevation contour. Cl. Cl shows a large variation on the order of a factor of three. The most enriched Cl is to the west of Tharsis, and may be indicative of volcanic outgassing or ignimbrites associated with the Medusae Fossae formation [7]. An interesting aspect of the Cl enrichment is that it constrains movement of dust with respect to the time of deposition of the Cl. This region is a region of low thermal inertia [8] and thus high dust content, yet the dust has not been able to bury the enriched Cl signature. (By comparing the transmission of high-energy and low-energy gamma-rays of Cl, we can set a limit on the burial depth of less than a few cm.) K and Th. These elements are discussed in detail in our companion abstract [9]. References:  [1] Boynton W. V. et al. (2004) Space Sci. Rev. (in press). [2] Lawrence D. J. et al. (2000) JGR, 105, 20307-20331. [3] Boynton W. V. et al. (2003) LPSC 34, #2108. [4] Kim K., Drake, D. and Reedy, R. (2003) LPSC 34 #1532. [5] ] Wänke H. et al. (2001) Space Sci. Rev. 96, 317-330. [6] Bandfield J. et al. (2000) Science, 287, 1626-1630. [7] Keller J. et al. (2003) Fall AGU #P12C-08. [8] Mellon M.T. (2000) Icarus, 148(2), 437-455 [9] Taylor G. J. et al. This volume. 
