 ACID-SULFATE VAPOR REACTIONS WITH BASALTIC TEPHRA:  AN ANALOG FOR MARTIAN SURFACE PROCESSES.  1D. C. Golden, 2D. W. Ming and 2R. V. Morris; 1Hernandez Engineering, Houston, TX; 2ARES, NASA-Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX (e-mail: d.c.golden@nasa.gov).  Introduction: Sulfur is a major chemical component of the Martian surface materials and is thought to have a volcanic origin. Pathfinder and Viking chemical analyses give SO3 concentrations for soil and dust in the range ~4-7 wt. % [1,2]. Although we know that S is chemically important, we do not know its speciation. Small amounts of sulfates (e.g., Ca and Mg sulfates) and sulfides (e.g., pyrrhotite, pyrite) have been identified in SNC meteorites [3]; however, sulfates have not been detected from remote spectral measurements. A variety of Fe-bearing sulfates (e.g., jarosite, schwertmannite) have been suggested as possible phases that might have formed under oxidative, acidic weathering conditions at the surface of Mars [4-7]. Other possible sulfate-bearing phases that might have formed at the surface include Al, Ca, and Mg sulfates.  Banin et al. [8] suggested an "acid-fog" weathering environment at the Martian surface. In their view, the weathering is relatively recent, occurring over the past few hundreds of millions of years in a process involving acidic volatiles. Their laboratory acid sulfate weathering experiments of palagonitic tephra resulted in formation of gypsum and alunogen (Al2(SO4)3 .17H2O). They hypothesize that the top layer of Mars "soil" formed by extremely slow ongoing weathering interactions at atmosphere-rock interfaces. The reactions are driven by acidic volatiles (e.g., SO2, Cl) deposited from the atmosphere and then reacted with the mineral surfaces in the dry Mars environment. Laboratory simulations of putative Mars-like weathering conditions on simulated Martian surface rocks offer an important method to complement or supplement spectroscopic observations in understanding the past (and present) Martian processes. The objective of this to study is to characterize the surface reaction products of acidsulfate vapor weathering of Mars-like materials (i.e., basaltic tephra). Materials and Methods:  Two basaltic tephra samples from Hawaii were used as Mars analog materials: (1) plagioclase-rich tephra HWMK725 from Mauna Kea Volcano (mineralogy: glass>plagioclase>> olivine) and (2) olivine-rich sand HWPC100 from the Puna Coast (mineralogy: glass>olivine>>plagioclase). Polished thin sections were prepared by embedding tephra and sand particles in epoxy. Thin sections were examined and characterized by SEM backscatter imaging and EDS chemical analysis prior to sulfuric acid treatments. Approximately, ½ of a 23 mL Teflon™ hydrothermal reaction vessel was filled with 4-mm-diameter quartz-glass beads. Two mL of conc. H2SO4 was added to the reaction vessel. A thin section (sample side up) was then placed on top of the glass beads, well above a concentrated H2SO4 solution. The Teflon container was closed tight, placed inside a steel casing, heated to 145oC in an incubator oven for six days, cooled to room temperature, and opened to recover the exposed section. Treated thin sections were stored at 56% humidity. SEM backscattered images and EDS analyses were conducted on carbon-coated thin sections. In separate experiments, granular basaltic particles were placed in small Pt dishes. The Pt dish was then place on top of quartz-glass beads and exposed to acidic vapors as described above. XRD was used for mineralogical analysis. Results and Discussion: Unaltered plagioclaserich basaltic tephra was dominated by plagioclase feldspar and glass, with minor amounts of olivine and titanomagnetite (Fig. 1). Olivine was the most altered phase after exposure to H2SO4 vapor (Fig. 1). Titanomagnetite appeared to resist acid attack (data not shown). Glass in some tephra particles appeared to have undergone considerable leaching as suggested by the abundance of gypsum on crystal surfaces (Fig. 1d). The difference in the degree of leach was attributed to compositional differences in the glasses, i.e., where, Na- and Mg-rich glass was more susceptible to acidic vapor leaching. Surfaces of nearly all tephra particles were covered with amorphous Si (data not shown). The surface precipitation of gypsum appears to be a function of the amount of Ca in the phase being leached, i.e., more gypsum nucleated at the surfaces of particles with high Ca contents (e.g., feldspar). Large plates of alunogen formed along the interfaces of the epoxy and tephra particles (Fig. 1a). Alunogen formation near the grain-epoxy interface suggests migration of solvated Al3+ along grain surfaces and subsequent nucleation at the interface. Large alunogen crystals were also observed in experiments with granular particles (data not shown). Unaltered olivine-rich basaltic sand was dominated by olivine in a glass matrix (Fig. 2). A few plagioclase and titanomagnetite crystals were also present within the glass matrix. Olivine (and plagioclase feldspar) crystals were highly reactive after exposure to sulfuric acid vapors as evident by etching features and precipitation of gypsum and Mg sulfates on particle surfaces (Figs. 2a-d). Although most gypsum crystals were submicron in size, a few large crystals (25-50 µm) also precipitated on particle surfaces (Fig. 2a). Several olivine crystals underwent extensive alteration to MgSO4.nH2O, which was the most abundant salt that formed in the olivine-rich  200 µm 20 µm 20 µm plpl olol glgl tmtm ol = olivine, pl= plagioclase, gl= glass, tm= titanomagnetite Untreated Plagioclase-Rich Tephra 200 µm 20 µm 20 µm plpl olol glgl tmtm 200 µm 20 µm 20 µm plpl olol glgl tmtm ol = olivine, pl= plagioclase, gl= glass, tm= titanomagnetite Untreated Plagioclase-Rich Tephra  50 µm 10 µm 10 µm 20 µm gl pl ol ol ol gl pl gl/gy adc bTreated Plagioclase-Rich Tephra al gy gl 50 µm 10 µm 10 µm 20 µm gl pl ol ol ol gl pl gl/gy adc bTreated Plagioclase-Rich Tephra al gy gl  Figure 1.  Sulfuric-acid vapor interactions on polished surfaces of plagioclase-rich tephra: (a) Blades of alunogen (Al2(SO4)3.17H2O (al) form near the particle-epoxy interface; (b,c) Plagioclase (pl), glass (gl), and rare olivine (ol) surfaces are decorated with gypsum (gy) crystals; and (d) Olivine (ol) surface is highly etched, but low in gypsum. All surfaces were covered by amorphous silica (~1-2 µm thick).    basaltic sand. Epsomite and hexahydrite were the observed sulfates, but they may have formed from a less hydrated, poorly crystalline state upon exposure to laboratory air (~56% R.H.). Additional experiments are planned to examine the Mg sulfate phases under anhydrous atmospheric conditions. Amorphous SiO2.nH2O formed at the surfaces of tephra grains (data not shown) and plate-shaped alunogen formed on crystal surfaces. Implications for Mars. Plagioclase-rich and olivine-rich basaltic tephra altered to alunogen, hydrated Mg-sulfate salts, gypsum, and amorphous silica (SiO2.nH2O) after interactions with sulfuric-acid vapors. Iron-bearing acid sulfate weathering products (e.g., jarosite and iron oxides) were not detected, implying unfavorable pH/Eh conditions for their formation. The formation of poorly crystalline phases from acid "fog" conditions is in agreement with the recent experimental work of [9]. Poorly crystalline Mg- and possibly Ca-sulfates may be the products of the interaction of acid-sulfate vapor and basaltic materials on Mars. The purported salt "crusts" on the Martian surface may include amorphous sulfate and Si phases that, because of their amorphous nature, may not have a strong spectral signature and thus be difficult to detect by remote sensing methods. References. [1] Bruckner J. et al. (2001) LPSC CD-ROM Abstract #1293. [2] Clark B. C. et al. (1982) JGR 87, 10059-10067. [3] McSween H. Y. (1994) Meteoritics 29, 757-779. [4] Burns R. G. (1988) LPSC XVII, 713-721. [5] Morris R. V. et al. (1996) Geochem. Soc. Sp. Pub. #5, 327-336. [6] Ming D. W. et al. (1996) LPSC XXVII, Abst., 883-884. [7] Bishop J. L. and Murad E. (1996) Geochem. Soc. Sp. Pub. #5, 337-358. [8] Banin A. et al. (1997) J. Geophys. Res. 102, 13,341-13,156. [9] Tosca, N. J. et al. (2003) LPSC XXXIV, Abst. #1325.  Unaltered Olivine-Rich Tephra ol = olivine, gl= glass, pl= plagioclase, tm= titanomagnetite glgl olol olol glgl glgl glglplpl tmtm Unaltered Olivine-Rich Tephra ol = olivine, gl= glass, pl= plagioclase, tm= titanomagnetite glgl olol olol glgl glgl glglplpl tmtm glgl olol olol glgl glgl glglplpl tmtm  gy agl epep bd ol gy 10 µm 5 µm 10 µm 50 µm cTreated Olivine-Rich Tephra ol ol ol gy agl epep bd ol gy 10 µm 5 µm 10 µm 50 µm cTreated Olivine-Rich Tephra ol ol ol  Figure 2. Sulfuric-acid vapor interactions on polished surfaces of olivine-rich tephra: (a,b,c) gypsum crystals (gy) precipitated on etched olivine (ol) surfaces. Note rare, large gypsum crystal in (a); (d) dark-shaped olivine crystal is completely altered to epsomite and amorphous silica (hexahydrite was also identified by XRD analysis in granular particle experiments and the amorphous silica only covered crystal surfaces and not epoxy). 
