 COORDINATED OBSERVATIONS OF AEOLIAN FEATURES FROM THE MARS EXPLORATION ROVERS (MER) AND THE MARS EXPRESS HIGH RESOLUTION STEREO CAMERA AND OTHER ORBITERS. R. Greeley1, S.D. Thompson1, P.L. Whelley1, S. Squyres2, G. Neukum3, R. Arvidson4, M. Malin5, R. Kuzmin6, P. Christensen1, S. Rafkin7, T. Michaels7, P. Pinet8, B. Joliff4, and N. Cabrol9, L. Richter10, E. Hauber11 , H. Hoffmann11 , R. Jaumann11 , and the Athena, HRSC, THEMIS, and MOC science teams. 1Arizona State University, Dept. of Geological Sciences, Box 871404, Tempe AZ  85287-1404, greeley@asu.edu, 2Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, 3Institute of Geosciences, Dept. of Earth Sciences, Freie Universitaet Berlin, D-12249, Berlin, Germany, 4Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130, 5Malin Space Science Systems, San Diego, CA 92191, 6Vernadsky Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 117975, GSP-1 Russia, 7Department of Space Studies, SWRI, Boulder, CO 80302, 8CNRS/University P. Sabatier Observatory Midi-Pyrenees, Toulouse, France 31400, Dept. Earth Planetary Sciences, 9NASA Ames, Moffett Field, CA 94035, 10DLR, D-51147 Koeln, Germany, 11DLR, D-12489 Berlin-Adlershof, Germany. Introduction: Surface features associated with aeolian (wind) processes at the Mars Exploration Rover  (MER) landing sites for Spirit (Gusev crater) and Opportunity (Sinus Meridiani) were observed from the surface and from orbit through coordinated observations by the rovers and the Mars Express orbiter High Resolution Stereo Camera and compared with features seen in other orbiter data and with wind vectors predicted by a numerical mesoscale model of the atmosphere (MRAMS; Rafkin et al., 2001). Features attributed to the wind at the Spirit site include duneforms and ripple-like bedforms, possible lag deposits of relatively dark granule-topebble size materials, and rocks that appear faceted and grooved by wind abrasion to form ventifacts. In addition, some rocks are undercut by removal of underlying material, while others are "perched" on the surface, suggesting that wind deflation has occurred, at least locally. Data over the site obtained from orbit (Greeley et al., 2003) show that the dominant wind-related features are low albedo patterns inferred to be tracks left by the passage of dust devils, in which dust is removed to expose a darker substrate. Spirit landed within one such track. The interpretation of dust removal is consistent with Mars Odyssey THEMIS data that indicate a paucity of dust in the area. Preliminary analysis of the orientations of the inferred dust devil tracks and barchan dunes seen from orbit suggests that the prevailing wind at the time of their formation was from the northwest, consistent with afternoon winds within Gusev crater predicted from the mesoscale model and consistent with times of active dust devil formation on Earth and Mars as was observed at the Pathfinder site. Putative wind-abraded rock facets also suggest formative winds from the northwest. The symmetric bedforms seen from the rover have axes that suggest formative winds from either the northwest or southeast; additional data from the rover might enable the identification of bedform asymmetry that would allow the specific formative wind orientation to be determined. Wind-related features at the Sinus Meridiani Opportunity  landing site seen from orbit are predominately bright wind streaks associated with craters and duneforms (including barchans), some of which are concentrated on crater floors. The orientations of most of these features correlate with prevailing afternoon winds from the northwest predicted by MRAMS (Greeley and Thompson, 2003). The Opportunity rover landed inside a small crater that, in orbiter images, shows a bright streak trending toward the southeast. Rover images show a surface mantled with particles as large as a few millimeters in diameter evenly distributed with about 5% density distribution within a matrix of finer particles. Thus, the particles have a bimodal size distribution: granule-size particle, some of which are spherical, and a second component composed of grains about 100 to 250 microns in diameter (the optimum size for movement by lowest winds on Mars). Inferred aeolian bedforms with wavelengths of 0.2 to 1 m are visible on the inside walls of the small crater within which Opportunity landed. A patch of smaller (wavelengths of a few cm) ripple-like features is seen next to the lander system and have orientations orthogonal to the larger bedforms on the crater wall. It is likely that wind-flow within the crater is substantially modified from the prevailing wind directions outside the crater. Differences in grain sizes and perhaps ripple geometries could play a significant role in the surface photometric behavior (Cord et al., 2003; Shkuratov et al., 2004). Lander and orbiter data indicate that the current prevailing agent of surficial modification on Mars is wind. New data from MER, MEX and other orbiters have the potential for providing new insight into the origin and evolution of putative  sedimentary materials on Mars and the role of aeolian processes in their formation, as well as the interpretation of remote sensing data. References: [1] Rafkin et al. (2001) Icarus 151 (228-256). [2] Greeley et al. (2003) J. Geophys. Res. Planets (in press). [3] Greeley and Thompson (2003) J. Geophys. Res. Planets (in press). [4] Cord et al. (2003) Icarus 165 414-427, [5] Shkuratov et al. (2004) Icarus (in press). Acknowledgements. We are grateful to the flight teams for the MER and Mars Express for the incredibly successful execution and operation of both missions. Parts of this work were supported by the NASA and ESA flight projects and the NASA Planetary Atmospheres (NAG 5-12803) and the Planetary Geology and Geophysics programs. 
