 COMPOSITION OF SIMULATED MARTIAN BRINES AND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE ORIGIN OF MARTIAN SALTS.  M. A. Bullock1, J. M. Moore2 and M. T. Mellon3 1Southwest Research Institute,  bullock@boulder.swri.edu, 2NASA Ames Research Center, 3Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics.   Introduction:  We report on laboratory experiments that have produced dilute brines under controlled conditions meant to simulate past and present Mars.  We allowed an SNC-derived mineral mix to react with pure water under a simulated present-Mars atmosphere for seven months [1].  We then subjected the same mineral mix to a similar aqueous environment for one year, but with a simulated Mars atmosphere that contained the added gases SO2, HCl and NO2.  The addition of acidic gases was designed to mimic the effects of volcanic gases that may have been present in the martian atmosphere during periods of increased volcanic activity.  The experiments were performed at one bar and at two different temperatures in order to simulate subsurface conditions where liquid water and rock are likely to interact on Mars.  The dominant cations dissolved in the solutions we produced were Ca2+, Mg2+, Al3+ and Na+, while the major anions are dissolved C, F-, SO4 2- and Cl-.  Typical solution pH was 4.2 to 6.0 for experiments run with a Mars analog atmosphere, and 3.6-5.0 for experiments with acidic gases added.  Abundance patterns of elements in the synthetic sulfate-chloride brines produced under acidic conditions were distinctly unlike those of terrestrial ocean water, terrestrial continental waters, and those measured in the martian fines at the Mars Pathfinder and Viking 1 and 2 landing sites.  In particular, the S/Cl ratio in these experiments was about 200, compared with an average value of ~5 in martian fines.  In contrast, abundance patterns of elements in the brines produced under a present day Mars analog atmosphere were quite similar to those measured in the martian fines at the Mars Pathfinder and Viking 1 and 2 landing sites.  This suggests that salts present in the martian regolith may have formed over time as a result of the interaction of surface or subsurface liquid water with basalts in the presence of a martian atmosphere similar in composition to that of today, rather than in an atmosphere higher in acidic volatiles. Experimental Approach:  To generate brines, samples of unaltered mineral mixtures, which are thought to represent the rock in the upper martian crust were ground, sorted, and mixed with doubly distilled water.  Individual pristine minerals were used to simulate martian rocks and have been chosen on the basis of SNC meteorite mineralogy [2].  The slurries were placed in an environment (pressure 1 bar, temperatures  3°, and 25° C), which represent the conditions within the martian subsurface where brines might reside. The atmospheric gases in the sample chambers were mixed to match the present composition of the martian atmosphere (CO2 95.50%, N2 2.70%, Ar 1.60%, O2 0.13%) in the first experiment.  In the second experiment, we used a CO2 atmosphere with an admixture of 100 ppm SO2, 100 ppm HCl, and 10 ppm NO2.  Samples were collected after durations of 1, 21, 42, 84, 168 and 336 days.  At the end of the exposure, the identity and abundances of water-soluble ions in the fluid were determined, and the rock samples were examined for the presence of precipitates and weathering products.  Anion concentrations were determined to ppb levels using a Dionics 4500I Ion Chromatograph (IC) using EPA 300 protocols.  Cations were also determined at ppb levels with an ARL 3410 Plus Inductively Coupled Plasma/Atomic Emission Spectrometer (ICP/AES), following the EPA 6010 protocol.  Controls of two types were also incubated during the experiment: (a) chambers with fluid and Mars-analog minerals with Earth gas, and (b) chambers with fluid, no rock, but with the Mars analog gas. Experimental Apparatus:  Two environmental chambers, one for each temperature, were constructed out of polycarbonate gloveboxes.  The chambers were instrumented with temperature and pressure sensors and active computer-controlled feedback circuits to maintain gas pressures in the chambers as well as in the individual experiment vessels.  The gloveboxes themselves were filled with CO2 and periodically purged with it.  36 vessels resided in each glove box, and were filled and periodically purged with the Mars gas mixture.  Temperature was controlled in the gloveboxes with thermostatic recirculating cooler/heaters.  All vessels were seated within deep depressions in massive aluminum pallets through which the coolant flowed. Results:  The mass abundances of mobile ions relative to Cl for terrestrial ocean water (blue line) [3], from the Viking Lander XRF experiment (red lines) [4, 5] and from our simulated Mars brines at 3°C (orange lines) are shown in Fig. 1.  Results from experiments with a simulated present-day martian atmosphere are shown with the dot-dashed orange line, and results from experiments performed under an acidic atmosphere are shown with the solid orange line.  Error bars show the 1-σ level of uncertainties for the Viking XRF and laboratory results.  Mobile ion concentrations on Mars are all enhanced relative to terrestrial seawater; most notable are the high S/Cl, Mg/Cl,  Ca/Cl and Al/S ratios for salts in the Mars soil.  Although results from the experiment with a present-day Mars-analog atmosphere compare well with Viking XRF data, those performed with an acidic atmosphere have too high a S/Cl ratio.  Similar data for experiments run at 25°C are shown in Fig. 2.  Figure 1.  Comparison of Mass Abundances at 3oC  Figure 2.  Comparison of Mass Abundances at 25oC Mass abundances of mobile ions relative to Cl for terrestrial ocean water (dash-3 dot blue line), average terrestrial river water (dash-dot light blue line) [3], and from water-soluble ions from the Nakhla meteorite (solid orange line) [6] are shown in Fig. 3.  Error bars on the Nakhla meteorite show the 1-σ level of experimental uncertainties.  As pointed out by [6], there is a striking correspondence between the soluble ion inventory of Nakhla and terrestrial seawater.  Averaged terrestrial river water is in general, enriched over seawater in all elements relative to Cl, although this is particularly true for S, Ca, and Al. Ongoing and Future Work:  Vitrified volcanic rock/water interactions may have been responsible for much of the deposited mobile cations and anions that we see on Mars today (e.g. [7]).  Since the mobility of cations is significantly different in glasses than it is in unaltered minerals, dissolution styles and rates will be most likely different from previous experiments.  Figure 3.  Terrestrial Waters Compared with Nakhla We are currently performing experiments with vitrified basalt (obtained from fresh lava flows at Kilauea volcano, Hawaii in September 2002) under a gas mixture representing the modern martian atmospheric composition, to assess the effects of glasses on the formation of martian brines. We have also constructed and tested an apparatus for producing evaporites from synthetic Mars brines (Fig. 4).  These evaporites can be produced from the desiccation of either liquid or frozen brines at 1-10 mbar.  By using this sample preparation method we will be able to identify the precipitates as well as monitor the succession of salts precipitated from the brines.  Figure 4.  Mars-Analog Evaporites Apparatus References:  [1] Bullock M. A. et al. (2004) submitted to Icarus.  [2] McSween H. Y. (1985) Reviews of Geophysics, 23, 391-416.  [3] Holland H. D. (1978) The Chemistry of the Atmospheres and Oceans, Wiley.  [4] Clark B. C. and Van Hart D. C. (1981) Icarus, 45, 370-378.  [5] Toulmin P. et al. (1977) Journal of Geophysical Research, 82, 4625-4634.  [6] Sawyer D. J. et al. (2000) Meteoritics and Planetary Science, 35, 743747.  [7] Newsom H. E. (1980) Icarus, 44, 207-216. 
