 MER FIELD OBSERVATIONS AND ANALYSIS OF VESICLES IN THE GUSEV PLAINS: SIGNIFICANCE AS RECORDS OF EMPLACEMENT ENVIRONMENT. L. S. Crumpler1 and the Athena Science Team. 1New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science, Albuquerque, NM 87104 (lcrumpler@nmmnh.state.nm.us)   Introduction. Estimates of past climate and atmospheric conditions are an important part of MER mission goals. Vesicles and lava structures provide information from which the emplacement mechanism and environment of emplacement of lava flows may be inferred. A variety of primary basaltic lava structures and textures, including variations in vesicularity, were observed in individual clasts and blocks during the extended traverse of Spirit within the basaltic plains of Gusev crater. Analysis of the occurrences, size, and shape distribution of vesicles and lava epistructure provide some preliminary estimates of the volatile content, lava emplacement style, and atmospheric conditions (pressure) at the time that the Gusev basalts were erupted. Background. Vesicles are bubbles of magmatic volatiles (largely H2O, CO2, CO) [1,2,3] exsolved on ascent and decompression from the melt source and, isobarically, by crystallization of anhydrous minerals during initial solidification and crystal growth [4], and subsequently trapped in lava flows and pyroclasts after the enclosing silicate liquid cools and solidifies. Bubbles in silicate melts grow through a combination of gas diffusion and by coalescence of two or more bubbles until solidification occurs. The vertical structure and vesicle distribution in lava sections typically include three distinct "units" or zones [5,6,7,8,9]: An upper vesicular zone with downwardly-increasing vesicle average diameters and downwardly-decreasing numbers per unit volume, and downwardly increasing joint block dimensions, often accounts for the upper one-half of a flow. The downward size and density distribution in the upper half of most vertical sections defines a characteristic vesicularity profile. Vesicularity is defined as the total vesicle volume per unit volume of dense matrix and agrees well with vesicularity estimates based on the ideal gas law [7,9]. Vesicularity at the surface of a lava flow is probably a function of initial lava vesicularity established by degassing during eruption to a gas volume significantly less than that necessary for fragmentation (<70 percent). Samples of initial vesicularity are typically preserved in the near surface of lava flows and is characterized by straight slopes in vesicle volume-distribution plots. Vesicle distributions in samples from lava flow interiors are characterized by distinctive curved slopes reflecting a vesicle population that has evolved through coalescence at the expense of an initial population [10]. Two populations develop: a log-normal population and a geometric growth population. A more important factor influencing vesicularity at a given level within the lava flow is the effect of confining pressure, a function of overburden and ambient atmospheric pressure. Differences in vesicularity in the upper lava section are expected to be relatively sensitive to differences in atmospheric pressure [8, 11]. Differences in ambient pressure are manifested in differences in the preserved gradients of vesicularity with depth. Observations. Athena observations documented the fundamentally basaltic composition of rocks within the Gusev plains [12, 13, 14, 15, 18]. Four broad classes of rock morphology are observed: (1) angular blocks with smooth (massive) textures and infrequent vesicles, (2) angular blocks with foliated textures and vesicle layers, (3) small irregular clasts bearing numerous vesicles, and (4) irregular clasts with distinct scoriaceous textures and primary fluid-shaped lava morphology (Fig. 1). These broad classes are interpreted as being derived from disruption of the three fold vertical structure of lava flows. Vesicles. The morphology of rocks along the traverse includes populations of small, commonly vesicular clasts (a few centimeters in size), and larger (several Figure 1. Some examples of block characteristics and vesicle distributions in rocks along the Spirit -Gusev plains traverse. A. Angular block several decimeters across with few vesicles. B. Sub-angular block ("Dagwood") several decimeters across with vesicle layers. C. Small irregular clast a few centimeters across with abundant vesicles. D. Scoriaceous clast (several decimeters containing delicate protuberances.  tens of centimeters), angular rocks that are generally less vesicular, but contain small, frequently irregular vesicles in Microscopic Imager data [13, 16]. The presence of locally more abundant vesicular clasts illustrates that despite the general impact gardening of the surface, delicate textures from the original scoriaceous surfaces (Fig. 1D) may be locally preserved. A few larger blocks (> 30 cm) contain vesicle layering (Fig. 1B) consisting of distinct zones of concentrated vesicles surrounded by less vesicular basalt. The typically small dimensions of vesicular clasts may derive from dispersal of the fractured and densely vesicular upper portions common to many lava flows [10, 17]. Larger and angular blocks are likely to represent samples of the less vesicular deeper flow interiors where planar fractures are more easily propagated in the homogeneous medium of non-vesicular flow interiors. This general correlation agrees with previous observations on Earth [17] on disturbed lava surfaces, in which rock dimension and vesicularity is a proxy for depth of origin. Measured vesicularity of clasts from the upper part of terrestrial lava flows show exponential vesicles size distributions. In contrast, hybrids of exponential and polynomial distributions are common within the flow interiors [17]. Since small vesicular clasts are a small fraction of the observed clast population, it is inferred that the upper vesicular zones within the Gusev plains lava flows were relatively thin (low vesicularity at shallow depths) compared with the overall thickness of the flow units. Likewise, vesicle distributions in the smaller clasts in the Gusev plains tend to be exponential, typical of upper sections, whereas, distributions in larger, more angular Gusev plains blocks are characterized by hybrid distributions, typical of flow interiors. All of the above types of measurement, together provide generalized estimates of the original location of individual fragments within a vertical lava section. These may be used in turn to estimate vesicularity variations with depth in the Gusev plains lava flows. When compared with vesicularity profiles calculated for lava flows erupted in differing atmospheric pressures, it is possible make general inferences about likely conditions during plains basalt emplacement. Examples are illustrated in Figure 2 for two rocks with measured vesicularities and estimated initial depths. Discussion. Vesicle distributions observed within the Gusev basaltic locks thus far are consistent with (although do not as yet prove) atmospheric pressure on Mars during the time of emplacement of the Gusev basaltic lavas similar to that existing today. These results are preliminary and represent a fusion of numerical predictions, and morphological inferences. While interesting and encouraging, anticipated variations in the measured parameters due to random processes of lava emplacement are known to exceed values of vesicularity and depth measured and inferred in this study, among other complications. In order to increase confidence in these results, current efforts are being directed at analysis of vesicularity and size distributions (both rock size and vesicle size) for all vesicular rocks encountered during traverse. Ultimately, observation of a complete lava section on Mars will be required to address actual vesicularity profiles. Reconstructions of the likely lava vertical structure and vesicularity profile from measurements of individual clasts along the traverse by Spirit over the basaltic surface of the Gusev plains offers a preview of the results that observed sections might provide. References: [1] Sparks, Jour. Volc. Geotherm. Res., 3, 1-37, 1978; [2] McBirney and Murase, Bull. Volcanol., 34, 372-384, 1970; [3] Verhoogen, Am. Jour. Sci., 249, 729-739, 1951; [4] Peck, U. S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 935-B, 59p., 1978; [5] Crumpler et al., Geol. Soc. Amer. Abstr. with Progr., 15, 419, 1983; [6] Aubele et al., Jour. Volc. Geoth. Res., 35, 349-374, 1988; ; [7] Walker, Bull. Volcanol., 51, 199-209,1989; [8] Sahagian et al., Bull. Volcanol., 52, 49-56, 1989; [9] Cashman and Kauahikaua, Geology, 25, 419422, 1997; [10] Crumpler, Lunar Planet Sci., 33, abstract no. 1896; [11] Sahagian and Maus,Nature, 372, 449-451, 1994; [12] Gellert et al., Science 305, 829, 2004; [13] McSween et al, Science 305, 842, 2004; [14] Christensen et al., Science 305, 837, 2004; [15] Morris et al, Science 305, 833, 2004; [16] Herkenhoff et al, Science 305, 824, 2004; [17] Crumpler, Geol Soc. Amer. Abstracts, 32, A394, 2000; [18] Greeley et al, Fluid Lava Flows in Gusev Crater this volume. Figure 2. Calculated vesicularity profiles for Earth and Mars. Model assumes, among other factors, gas content sufficient for 60 per cent vesicularity at the surface of the lava flow for current Earth atmospheric pressure, approximate current Mars (10 Mb) atmospheric pressure, and hypothetical Mars surface with higher (100Mb) atmospheric pressure. Observed vesicularity of Martian rocks Soufflé (Pathfinder) and Dagwood (Spirit, sol142) and estimated initial depths within corresponding lava flows are shown by blue and red boxes. 
