 MARS EXPRESS IMAGING PHOTOMETRY AND SURFACE GEOLOGIC PROCESSES AT  MARS: WHAT CAN BE MONITORED WITHIN GUSEV CRATER? P. C. Pinet1 , A. Cord1,2, A. Jehl1, Y.D. Daydou1, S.C. Chevrel1, D. Baratoux1,  R. Greeley3, D. A. Williams3, G. Neukum4, and The Mars Express HRSC CoInvestigator Team, 1UMR 5562 / CNRS / GRGS, Observatoire Midi-Pyrénées, Toulouse, France, Patrick.Pinet@cnes.fr, 2European Space Agency (ESA), European Space & Technology Centre (ESTEC), P.O.Box 299, 2200 AG Noordwijk, The Netherlands, acord@rssd.esa.int, 3Department of Geological Sciences, Arizona State University, Box 871404, Tempe AZ 85287-1404, greeley@asu.edu, 4Freie Universitaet Berlin, Department of Earth Sciences, Malteserstr. 74-100 Building D, D-12249 Berlin Germany, gneukum@zedat.fu-berlin.de. Introduction: Access to the particle size and rock abundances from the sub-meter down to the microscale  range is critical  for  the determination of geological processes that affect the planetary surfaces. Indeed, the geological processes controlling the size or being controlled by the size of particles include the volcanic processes, the  surface features driven by the fluvial, aeolian or glacial activity, the landslides, the impact cratering and ejecta processes, and, last but not least, coating processes. Reflectance measurements of selected rocks and soils over a wide range of illumination geometries have been obtained by the Viking Lander, Mars Pathfinder and MER multispectral imaging facilities and provide local constraints on the interpretations of the physical and mineralogical nature of the Martian surface materials. A new investigation from orbit that can be addressed from Mars Express (MEx ) with the multi-angular High Resolution Stereo Camera (HRSC) dataset, generated with the nadir-looking, stereo and photometric channels, is to derive the surface photometric characteristics for mapping the variation of the soil/bedrock physical properties of Mars, and to relate them to the spectroscopic and thermal observations produced by OMEGA, TES and THEMIS instruments. Data analysis and results:  Given the wealth of in situ information recently acquired within the Gusev crater [e.g.,1,2,3], with the very successful landing of the Mars Exploration Rover, Spirit and its fruitful traverse to the Columbia Hills, we have drawn a special attention to the multi-angular observations made respectively on January, 16th  and February, 1st ,2004 during the overlapping MEx orbits 24 and 72 which flew over Gusev, with different observation geometries. As a result, since the bidirectional reflectance of the surface depends on the illumination and viewing geometry, it is possible in the present case to document the phase function with 8 different phase angle conditions ranging from 30  to 52 degrees. A first regional survey of the photometric properties is carried out for a significant part of the Gusev crater floor, with a resolution cell of 1.6x1.6 km2. For this purpose, an inverse method optimizing the determination of the global set of Hapke parameters, developed and tested on experimental data produced with a laboratory wide-field multispectral imaging facility, is implemented on the HRSC orbital dataset [4,5].  In this approach, the local variations of incidence and emission angles induced by the topographic variations are not taken into account but should not be critical given the overall flatness of the crater floor and the considered cell spatial size. Given the phase angle coverage, we cannot retrieve the parameters related to the opposition effect as they are unconstrained. Conversely, parameters b, c, describing the material properties through the particle phase function approximated by the double Henyey-Greenstein function (b determines the phase function form and c the forward /  backward scattering behavior) , the surface roughness θ parameter and the single scattering albedo w appear to be well determined. Maps of these photometric quantities are derived and some results shown hereafter. One notes immediately striking variations across the crater floor. Indeed, significant photometric changes are revealed between the different units across the crater. A particular emphasis is put on the surface properties associated with the dark wind streaks regions, in the low albedo (LA) region where Spirit has landed (SL site) [1,  6, 7]. These units combine a prevailing backscattering behavior (0.65<c< 0.78) and a rather low surface roughness (7 <θ  <9°), suggesting a microscale texture indicative of a rather smooth granular surface, in sharp contrast with the surface roughness properties generally observed in the surrounding  areas showing both an intermediate to forward scattering behavior and a rougher texture (17 <θ < 27°). Interestingly, except for some local anticorrelated behaviors as seen for the dark wind streaks units referred to hereafter as A, B, C, no systematic correlation between MOC or HRSC surface albedos and the HRSC derived photometric quantities is observed as checked with a principal component analysis,  confirming the surface complex photometric variability [8]. A clear photometric contrast is also noted in the northern part of the crater, revealing that the surface texture  clearly varies between the PL (Plains) and WR (wrinkled) units [ 6, 7], the PL unit behaving very much the same as the A, B, C patches, while the WR one is both rougher (17 <θ < 23°) and more forward scattering suggesting the occurrence of some mantling . Conclusion:  Whether this is indicative of differences in the lava flow properties emplaced on the floor of Gusev [9], of impact-related materials being redistributed or of wind-related processes, is still an open question as it is a rather difficult issue to deconvolve these respective contributions. However, the photometric measurements which are produced here are very sensitive to the surface organization and distribution of particles ranging in size from a few microns to a centimeter, in the very upper planetary layer.  The present results seen for the low albedo units LA and to some extent for an extended part of the crater floor (within the yellow contour) , i.e. the observed combination of both a strong backscattering behavior and a smooth microtexture, are consistent with an eroded/ abraded/ packed or cemented-like surface of rather coarse grains possibly mixed with dust and/or small-sized particles filling the empty surface interstices. Together with laboratory measurements, terrestrial field and in situ Viking Lander observations [ 4, 10], it is consistent with the occurrence of basaltic rock surfaces or packed sands, smoothed by exposure to wind abrasion and possibly coated with dust, in alternance with surrounding rougher soil surfaces embedded in an aeolian mantling, with features such as ripples, dunes and soil patches. The results produced so far for the Gusev crater floor demonstrate that this new MEx orbital information can be used for characterizing the Martian surface. Indeed, significant variations of the surface roughness and texture are revealed in relation to the investigated geologic surfaces, and are complementary to the TES and THEMIS thermophysical data .[e.g., 6,7]. References: [1] Greeley R. et al.(2004), Science, 305, 810. [2] Arvidson R.E. et al. (2004), Science, 305, 821. [3] Herkenhoff K.E. et al. (2004), Science, 305, 824. [4] Cord  A.M. et al. (2003),  Icarus , 165, 414. [5] Pinet P.C. et al. (2004), Proc. Ischia Mars Conf . [6] Milam K.A. et al. (2003). JGR, 108, 8078. [7] Martinez-Alonso S., JGR, in press. [8] Pinet P. C. and C. Rosemberg (2001), LPSC XXXII,  # 1640. [9] Greeley R. et al. (2004). LPSC XXXVI, this issue. [10] Guinness E.A. et al. (1997),  JGR, 102, 687. 
