 THE EFFECT OF MARTIAN SURFACE GEOMETRY ON ULTRAVIOLET FLUXES  J. E. Moores1 , P.H. Smith1, and R. Tanner1 ; 1Lunar and Planetary Lab, University of Arizona 1629 E University Blvd, Tucson, Arizona, 85721. correspondence:  jmoores@lpl.arizona.edu .   Introduction: The atmosphere of Mars, unlike that of the Earth, does little to attenuate incoming ultraviolet radiation. Such large amounts of ultraviolet radiation are known not only to sterilize the hardiest of terrestrial organisms within minutes [1], but to chemically alter the soil such that organic molecules in the upper few cm are rapidly destroyed [2]. Thus the survival of any putative Martian life near the surface depends to a large extent on how much ultraviolet radiation is received at its location. As such, variations in smallscale geometry of the surface such as pits, trenches, flat faces and overhangs can have a significant effect on the observed flux and create "safe havens" for organisms. Furthermore, by quantifying this reduction in radiation we can better pick targets for landed missions knowing which geometries offer us the best chance of uncovering such a safe haven.  Method: A theoretical approach was taken to determine the appropriate fluxes. A numerical 1-Dimensional model based upon the doubling and adding method coded by Martin Tomasko and Lyn Doose to study the atmosphere of Titan [3] was adapted to the atmosphere of Mars. In this code, the atmosphere is divided up into discrete layers each of which may be populated with particles and gasses as desired to achieve the correct radiative transfer properties through that layer. Thus the main focus of the initial code development was finding appropriate values for dust and ice in the atmosphere.  Since dust and ice are often vertically separated in the Martian atmosphere, the overall atmosphere was modeled as two discrete layers. The layer closest to the surface was made up of the bulk of the atmospheric carbon dioxide combined with dust. This dust was assumed to match the properties determined by the Mars Pathfinder (MPF) Mission of particles with a mean radius of 1.6 microns and a 0.2 variance distribution [4].  The upper layer contained sub-micron ice particles and a trace of carbon dioxide. The addition of these small particles which have so far eluded detection in orbital studies was necessary to explain the so-called 'blue anomaly' observed in MPF spectra [5] and to match the blue tail of the MPF Multi-Spectral Spot [6]. These particles had a diameter of 0.2 microns and a variance of 0.2.  Geometries: Once the radiative transfer problem had been solved it was necessary to determine how the fluxes varied over small scale local geometry.  This was accomplished by dividing the sky into discrete elements and representing each as a distinct point source of radiation. Since these were exactly the same points used to determine the bulk radiative transfer function, the variation in intensity for each point across the sky was known. Numerous runs were made using the code in varying geometrical configurations. In particular we considered the base case of a billiard ball Mars as well as four idealized geometries: rectangular trenches (idealFigures 1 (top) and 2: total energy received and maximum daily fluence by latitude on the day of the Northern Summer Solstice on Mars. Summer Solstice Daily Energy 05 10 15 20 -90 -60 -30 0 30 60 90 North Latitude (degrees) In ci de nt E ne rg y (1 0^ 5 J/ da y) Low Dust MPF Dust Storm Summer Daily Maximum Fluences 020 40 60 -90 -60 -30 0 30 60 90 North Latitude (degrees) Flu en ce ( W/s qm ) ized cracks), pits (small craters or other depressions) flat faces and overhangs. In terms of size, the geometries used are simply expressed by ratios such as depth to diameter or in the case of overhangs, height above the surface to the overhang characteristic width. Despite this we are bounded by two assumptions, first that the geometries are small enough that they do not affect the bulk sky brightness significantly and second that they are large compared to the wavelengths under consideration.  Base-Case Results: We show an example of this base case of a smooth Mars for differing dust content in the atmosphere in figures 1 and 2. In these graphs there are two interesting trends to point out. First, even though the maximum daily ultraviolet flux occurs at the northern tropic line, high values of incident energy persist to much higher latitudes. The reason for this is that as we head poleward the sun does not get as high in the sky at noon, however, the day  becomes longer to counteract this effect.  The second trend is seen in the relative fluxes under different conditions of atmospheric dust. The dark blue line labeled "low dust" corresponds to low dust conditions observed in 1999 by HST of about τ = 0.3 (671nm) [7], The red "MPF" line refers to Mars Pathfinder-Like conditions with τ = 0.5 (671nm) and finally "Dust Storm" refers to a light dust storm condition in which τ = 1.1 (671nm). The important thing to notice here is that we get decreecing flux with increasing dust content, but that the fall off between optical depth 0.3 and 1.1 is less then 30%. This is due to the high scattering efficiency of the particles which cause substantial increases in the observed diffuse flux, compensating for the attenuation of the direct beam. As a result, for geometries which shield surfaces from the direct beam, high atmospheric dust content can lead to a substantial increase in the observed diffuse flux from other parts of the sky. Geometry Results: While the four different geometrical configurations tried were able to produce protection compared to a billiard-ball Mars at specific sites on specific days of the year the most important factor for long term survivability is protection over a Martian year (or longer timescales). When we look at each geometry individually, we find that the best protection offered by each varies by location. For instance, overhangs were most effective in the tropics where sun angles remain high except near sundown. Pole-facing faces were most effective in temperate zones. Trenches and Pits were most effective at northern latitudes where the perpetually low sun angle prevents light from entering a trench.  What is most important, however, is quantitative reduction in fluxes; that is how high a rock face, or how deep a trench is required to provide a reduction to earth-like levels of Ultraviolet radiation. An example of this reduction is shown in figure 3 for the underside of an overhang at varying distances from the surface. Discussion: From an astrobiological context organisms need many things in order to survive and grow. Immunity from destruction at the hands of ultraviolet rays is only one of these prerequisites, many of which such as liquid water are also hard to come by on modern Mars. However, it may be that life once inhabited the surface or even today lives just below it, far enough down to be shielded from ultraviolet rays and any harmful chemicals produced. By identifying localized spots on the surface where ultraviolet fluxes are lessened by small-scale geometries we can determine where this potential underground life could be close to the surface or where they may lie in a dormant state waiting for a return to wetter and warmer times.  References: [1] Schuerger, A. (2003) Icarus 165 n°2 pp.253-276 [2] Stoker, C. (1997) 102 n°E5 pp.10881-10888 [3] Tomasko, M.G. (2005) Nature 438 n°7069 pp.765-778 [4] Tomasko, M.G. et al (1999) JGR 104 n°E4 pp.8987-9007 [5] Smith, P.H. and Lemmon, M. (1999) JGR 104 n°E4 pp.8975-8985 [6] Thomas, N. et al (1999) JGR 104 n°E4 pp.87958808  [7] Bell, J. F., III et al (2002) DPS34.0504B  Figure 3: reduction in calculated flux resulting from bringing an overhang (idealized as a suspended flat plate) near to the surface. [Phoenix Landing site is 70°N at LS =87 ] 
