 THE AERIAL REGIONAL-SCALE ENVIRONMENTAL SURVEY (ARES): A NEW TOOL FOR THE EXPLORATION OF MARS: J. S. Levine1 and the ARES Science and Engineering Teams. 1NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, 23681-2199 (joel.s.levine@nasa.gov). Summary: The Aerial Regional-scale Environmental Survey or ARES is a mission to explore Mars by obtaining both in situ and remote measurements of the atmosphere, surface and sub-surface.  ARES is a robotic, powered airplane that will fly very close to the surface of Mars (1-2 km) and cover hundreds to thousands of kilometers and will obtain scientific data to address fundamental problems in Mars science. ARES helps to fill a gap in the spatial scale and geographical perspective between landers/rovers and orbiters in the Mars Exploration Program and addresses many key COMPLEX/MEPAG questions (e.g., following the water in the near-surface atmosphere over regional-scale distances, the search for atmospheric methane and other gases of biogenic origin, the search for gases of volcanic origin, nature and origin of crustal magnetic anomalies, etc.) not readily pursued in other parts of the exploration program. ARES supports the human exploration program through key environmental measurements and high resolution contiguous data essential to reference mission design, including measurements of the structure and dynamics of the Mars planetary boundary layer over regional-scale distances. Here we describe the major types of scientific goals, candidate instruments, and reference mission profiles. Mission Summary: ARES is a proposed Mars Scout Mission designed to use a robotic, powered airplane platform to fly over the surface of Mars and make measurements of key science objectives. ARES extends and complements NASA's Mars Exploration Program (MEP) by returning benchmark measurements in four critical scientific themes: 1. Crustal Magnetism, 2. Near-Surface Atmospheric Composition and Chemistry, 3. Near-Surface and Sub-Surface Volatiles and Climate Change, and 4. The structure and dynamics of the planetary boundary layer.  These embody six primary science objectives: 1. High spatial resolution crustal magnetic survey and crustal magnetism source structure. 2. The search for atmospheric methane and other potential gases of biogenic and volcanic origin. 3. The role of water vapor in the Mars atmospheric chemical cycle. 4. Evidence for near-surface and sub-surface volatiles. 5. Regional geological context. 6. The structure and dynamics of the planetary boundary layer. ARES will provide fundamental scientific insight into the origin and evolution of magnetic fields, early planetary crustal formation processes and its relationship to crustal magnetism, composition and chemistry of the near-surface atmosphere, the distribution and chemistry of water vapor in the near-surface atmosphere, Mars' volatile and climate history, the viability of Mars as a biosphere conducive to past or present life and the planetary boundary layer. ARES offers the opportunity to target and explore specific regions of highest scientific interest, returning previously unobtainable measurements from a vantage point of 1-2 km above the surface across hundreds to thousands of kilometers of diverse terrain. ARES provides NASA with the opportunity to elicit an immediate and significant science response while inspiring the next generation of explorers through a large and complementary Education and Public Outreach (E/PO) effort. Science Payload: A comprehensive suite of candidate science instruments provides critical, high-priority COMPLEX and MEPAG measurements: -Magnetometer: Magnetic field with 2 km spatial resolution and 1 nT sensitivity. -Mass Spectrometer: Atmospheric constituents measured insitu with 1 ppb sensitivity. -Neutron Spectrometer: Assess distribution of sub-surface water at high resolution and in geological context. -Ionizing Radiation Detector: Provide measurements supporting the human exploration program. -Atmospheric Flight Data System: Regional-scale atmospheric temperature, pressure, density and wind speed and direction. -Context Camera: Contiguous imagery of science traverse over 3 km horizontal swath. -Video Camera: Video rate images of critical deployment events, aerial platform and science traverse and a powerful tool in ARES education and public outreach (EPO). Science Advancements: ARES science objectives, measurement requirements and data products flow directly from NASA's strategic plan for Mars Exploration, the COMPLEX and MEPAG reports. ARES' science return is derived from orders of magnitude improvement in spatial resolution and precision. -Two orders of magnitude higher spatial resolution magnetic survey than provided by Mars Global Surveyor (MGS), with the ability to resolve the crustal magnetism source structure. -Search for atmospheric methane and other short-term species in the atmosphere of potential biogenic and volcanic origin [e.g., 1]. -First direct measurement of near-surface water vapor, its photochemical products and other chemically active gases. -Orders of magnitude better Neutron Spectrometer resolution and correlation with geology. Mission Architecture: ARES implementation includes robust technical margins and flight proven systems to achieve flexibility and success. The ARES mission delivers an airplane to Mars with a spacecraft derived from Genesis heritage, and an entry and descent system derived from Pathfinder and Mars Exploration Rover. The rocket-propelled airplane autonomously completes a pre-planned, inertially navigated science traverse. Science and critical event data is relayed to the ARES spacecraft bus as it performs a Mars flyby and is returned to Earth within 18 hours of the airplane flight through the 34 m DSN subnet. All data is disseminated and archived within 6 months of receipt. A Reference Mission: Launch Vehicle: Delta 2925 -Launch Dry Mass: 522 kg -Launch Wet Mass: 678 kg wet (35% margin) Mission Design: -Flyby spacecraft design and operations -Direct entry trajectory -Critical events link margin: 7 dB -Airplane to S/C link margin: 12 dB -S/C to Earth link margin: 3 dB Airplane -Mass: 66.5 kg dry (32% reserve), 125 kg wet -Altitude: 1.5 km AGL, Ground Speed: 140 m/s -Wing span: 6.2 m -Maximum Duration: 101 min -Maximum Range: 850 km -Peak Power Margin: 53%, Cost Reserve: 49% Airplane Robustness: ARES airplane size allows: -Use of traditional design, test and manufacturing techniques. -Credible aerodynamic performance and stability predictions. -Flight-proven systems and a large payload volume margin. -A majority of the implementation risk to be contained in a single well-defined and testable event: airplane deployment. -Robust stability and control margins to accommodate uncertainties in the Mars environment; large margin ensures delivery of a robust, flight qualified system. References: [1] Formisano, V., S. Atreya, T. Encrenaz, N. Ignatiev, and M. Giuranna, Detection of methane in the atmosphere of Mars, Science, 306 (5702), 1758-1761, 2004.  ARES Mission to Mars: J. S. Levine and the ARES Science and Engineering Teams Figure 5.  ARES bridges critical scale and resolution measurement gaps in the core MEP. Figure 2.  Artist's conception of ARES collecting data over the surface of Mars. Figure 3.  Video still from the successful deployment of a half-scale model of ARES at Mars-relevant atmospheric pressure above Oregon, USA (see http://marsairplane.larc.nasa.gov/multimedia.html for full sequence). Figure 1.  Artist's conception of ARES performing its survey over the surface of Mars Figure 4.  Some of the scientific payload onboard ARES. 
