 LIQUID-LIQUID EXTRACTION OF INCLUDED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS FROM DISSOLVED SULPHATE MINERALS PERFORMED ON A MICROFLUIDIC FORMAT.  S. A. Bowden1*, R. Wilson2, J. Parnell1 and J. M. Cooper2, 1 Department of Geology & Petroleum Geology, University of Aberdeen, UK. AB24  3UE. Fax: +44 (0)1224 272785; Tel: +44 (0)1224 273467; Email: s.a.bowden@abdn.ac.uk, 2 Department of Electronics and Electrical Engineering, University of Glasgow, UK..   Introduction:  The presence of sulfates on the surface of Mars was indicated by a strong Mg-S correlation in the fluorescence data obtained by the Viking landers [1]. Sulfates were subsequently identified as being present in the soil at the Pathfinder landing site at a concentration of ~ 10 % MgSO4 [2]. Data from the Opportunity rover indicates that sulfates of probable evaporite origin are present in Eagle crater, Meridiani Planum where the sulfates constitute ~ 40 % by weight of the bedrock and could have a formed by direct precipitation from water or during early burial [3]. Thermal emission spectrometer data suggest that the major sulfate phases are magnesium and calcium sulfates [4].  Laboratory spectra of hydrated magnesium sulfates and sodium carbonates are a close match to the spectra obtained by Calisto's Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer for the dark regions that are present surface of Europa [5]. Therefore hydrated sulfates may be present on the surface of Europa. Both Mars and Europa have astrobiological significance because liquid water may have been or may be present on both bodies; indeed magnesium sulfates and other mineral phases that precipitate from water are indicators of potential past habitability. Water can become incorporated within a sulfate crystal as it precipitates from solution and form a separate aqueous phase in the form of discrete inclusions that are entirely surrounded by a host mineral matrix. Particulate matter and liquid organic phases can also be incorporated as inclusions.  Because included organic matter is completely protected from destruction by its external environment, any organic matter included within minerals is resistant to destruction by an oxidating environment. However, in order to analyze organic inclusions within mineral phases it is necessary to break apart the host mineral matrix and extract the contents of inclusions. One method applicable to inclusions in water-soluble minerals is to dissolve the mineral matrix and perform a liquid extraction. This also serves as a signal concentration step for analytical purposes. Liquid-liquid extraction can be performed on microfluidic devices called H-Cells [6]. These have a small footprint, low mass and low power requirements. By establishing a stable interface between the two liquid phases within a low Reynolds number microfluidic format, liquid-liquid extraction by diffusion across a laminar interface can be performed using two miscible liquid phases (e.g. methanol and water).  Methodology:   Sample preparation. Samples of magnesium sulfate possessing inclusions of stearic acid (C18H37OOH) and anthracene (C14H10) were prepared by precipitating a mineral phase from an aqueous solution or mixture that contained the organic compound. Images of inclusions  within the sulfate minerals are shown in Fig.1. Properties of the sample materials are shown in Table 1.  30 µm Stearic acid 100 µm Anthracene 30 µm Stearic acid 100 µm Anthracene Figure 1. Electron microscope images of  organic inclusions within magnesium sulfate crystals. Dark areas are organic and light areas are magnesium sulfate.   Average analyte concentration  as inclusions  µg / g MgSO4 Average inclusion diameter µm Anthracene 200 50 Stearic acid 800 10  Device Fabrication. A device was fabricated from glass using photolithographic pattern transfer followed by wet etching.  Positive photoresist was coated onto 1 mm thick sodalime glass microscope slides and UV light was exposed onto the coated plate through an acetate sheet photomask. The photoresist layer was developed prior to the glass plate being immersed in a hydrofluoric acid buffered oxide etch solution. The remaining photoresist was removed with acetone. After rinsing in de-ionized water and drying, a glass substrate with pre-drilled holes corresponding to the locations of inlets and outlets was thermally bonded to this patterned substrate. Short lengths of uncoated fused silica capillary were attached to the inlets and outlets and tubing used to interface the microfluidic device to two computer-controlled microsyringe pumps. The  dimensions of the channel in which the extraction was performed were 600 µm width, 60 µm depth and 25 mm length.  Processing and Analysis. The experimental setup is shown in Fig.2. An aqueous phase containing the dissolved mineral phase and organic analyte (partially dissolved in many instances) is injected through one inlet and an extracting organic solvent injected through the other inlet. Toluene has been used to extract anthracene and methanol to extract stearic acid. Samples have been dissolved in both acid and water. The products were collected offline and then analyzed by GCMS. Various device parameters can be varied such as the flow rate of the two solvent streams, the residence time of a sample particle within the device and the proportion of the extracting solvent phase that exits through the solvent outlet. dissolved sample solvent 3)GC-MSorganic mineral 1)Syringe Pumps 2)Microfluidic Device dissolved{ dissolved sample solvent 3)GC-MSorganic mineral 1)Syringe Pumps 2)Microfluidic Device dissolved{ Figure 2. Experimental setup.   Discussion and Results: Initial results suggest that liquid-liquid extraction performed on a microfluidic device is capable of extracting organic matter from inclusions present within sulfate minerals. The limits of the device have not yet been fully explored but we have succeeded in extracting sub microgram quantities of material.   Figure 3. Yield of stearic acid obtained by extraction performed on a microfluidic device compared to the calculated yields obtained by conventional liquid-liquid extraction performed in vials.  Currently, the extractions that we have performed on the microfluidic device are not as efficient as conventional liquid-liquid extractions (Fig.3). However, the device is yet to be optimized and the poor extraction efficiency probably results from the lack of repeated stages of extraction. Thus, we expect that as we use the device to extract smaller quantities of material the relative extraction efficiency will increase (although a single stage extraction will never be as efficient as a multiple-stage extraction).   Figure 4. Optimisation of device with regard to residence time. Device optimization is under way and will involve both numerical modeling, evaluation of different extracting solvents (miscible and immiscible), varying channel geometries as well as device parameters such as residence time, sample pH etc. (Fig.4). Conclusions: Our preliminary results illustrate that a microfluidic device can readily extract included organic compounds from dissolved sulfates. Currently there are a number of issues to be explored. Amongst these are the performance of the microfluidic device when the sample is only partially dissolved or when the sample contains varying quantities of insoluble material. We are also evaluating different channel geometries, device configurations and the efficiency of multiple microfluidic devices to separate out different classes of organic compound. References: [1] Clark B. C. (1976) Science 194, 1283-1288. [2] Wänke H. et al. (2001) Space Sci. Rev. 96, 317-330. [3] Squyres S. W. et al. (2004) Science 306, 1709-1714. [4] Christensen, P. R. et al. (2004) Science 306, 1733-1739. [5] McCord T.B. et al. (1998) Science 280 1242-1245. [6] P.B. Brody, P. Yager, Sensors and Actuators A 1997, 58, 13-18. Acknowledgments: EPSRC for grant number GR/547267/01. 
