 Stratigraphy of Water-Equivalent Hydrogen at High Northern Latitudes on Mars.  W.C. Feldman1, R.C. Elphic1, O. Gasnault2, J.J. Hagerty1, D.J. Lawrence1, S. Maurice2, M.T. Mellon3 1Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico, USA (wfeldman@lanl.gov), 2Centre d'Etude Spatiale des Rayonnements, Toulouse, France, 3Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, USA.      Introduction: A determination of the abundance and stratigraphy of near-surface water on Mars can provide important information about water-emplacement mechanisms, the history of martian climate variations, and future resource utilization. One way to investigate hydrogen deposits on Mars is through the use of thermal, epithermal, and fast neutron leakage currents, which provide a sensitive measure of hydrogen in the top meter of the martian surface [e.g., 1,2]. It is possible to convert neutron measurements into abundance and stratigraphy information with the aid of spatial models; however, the fact that there are only three measureables means that the models must be extremely simple.     Accordingly, a one-dimensional model is essential, which consists of two layers that are spatially infinite in surface area.  The unknowns of this model include the abundance of hydrogen in the upper layer, the thickness of this layer, and the abundance of hydrogen in the lower layer, which is assumed to be infinitely thick.  For the sake of simplicity, these abundances have been specified in units of waterequivalent hydrogen (WEH) even though neutrons cannot discriminate between the various possible molecular associations of hydrogen.     Methodology:  The problem with past attempts to determine H abundance and stratigraphy from neutrons is that although epthermal and fast neutron currents are relatively insensitive to the elemental composition of surface soils, thermal neutrons are very sensitive.  Of most relevance to Mars is the abundance of Cl and Fe.  We avoid this problem here by confining our attention to the northern high latitudes between 55o and 75o, primarily within the Vastitas-Borealis formation.  This region appears to be relatively young and covered by a thick veneer of wind-blown soils (e.g., [3] and references therein), and therefore is likely to be relatively uniform in composition. We approximate the uniform composition of this region with the composition determined by Pathfinder [4].  Measurement of the three neutron currents using the Mars Odyssey Neutron Spectrometer can then be interpreted in terms of the WEH abundance of the upper layer, its thickness, and the WEH abundance of the lower, semi-infinite layer.     Results:  A specific example of our survey is shown in Figure 1 for longitudes between +60o and +120o.  The upper two panels show maps of the ratio of fast-toepithermal neutrons (F/E) on the left and fast-to-thermal neutrons (F/T) on the right.  Neutron moderation theory [5] shows that F/E gives the macroscopic energy-loss cross section, which is most sensitive to the abundance of WEH. F/T gives the macroscopic absorption cross section, which is primarily sensitive to elemental composition, but is also sensitive to hydrogen burial depth.  The lower four panels of Fig. 1 compare the fast and epithermal neutron fluxes (left panels) to simulations for an assumed WEH upper layer abundance of 1%  (middle panels) and 5% (lower panels) by mass.  The right-hand panels give the same comparison for thermal and epithermal currents.       Inspection shows that all measurables fit well within the simulation boundaries for WEH(up)=1% but do not fit well for 5%.  Furthermore, both thermal and fast neutron measurements appear to be self-consistent with each other for WEH(up) =1%.  Similar results are obtained for the assumption of WEH(up)=2%, but the 1% simulations appear to give a better agreement between fast and epithermal simulations.  Ranges of WEH(low) and burial depths for all longitudes between latitudes of +55o and +75o extend between 5% and 50% by mass  and 5 g/cm2 and 20 g/cm2, respectively.  These results should now be compared with, and thereby constrain, various climate models of water recharge and retention by northern high-latitude, near-surface soils.     References:  [1] Feldman et al., JGR., 98, 20855-20870, 1993.  [2] Feldman et al., JGR., 105, 20347-20363, 2000.  [3] Tanaka et al., JGR., 108, doi:1029/2002JE001908, 2003.  [4] Wanke et al., Space Sci. Rev., 96, 317-330, 2001.  [5] Fermi, 'Nuclear Physics', Univ. Chicago Press, 1950.    Figure 1.  North-polar stereographic maps of the ratio of fast to epithermal neutron currents (top left) and fast to thermal currents (top right).  The lower panels give an overlay of measured thermal, epithermal, and fast neutron counting rates on MCNPX simulations. 
