 MARS DUST MICROMECHANICS: MER MARSDIAL AND LABORATORY OBSERVATIONS.  L. E. Möller1, M. Tuller1, L. Baker1, and K. Kuhlman2, 1Environmental Physics Laboratory, PSES, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844-2239; lucasm@uidaho.edu, mtuller@uidaho.edu, lbaker@uidaho.edu, 2Planetary Science Institute, 8220 N County Rd M, Evansville, WI  53536, kim@psi.edu.   Introduction:  In future human exploration of Mars, many challenges face us. Mars is a dusty planet and dust and windblown particulates will present one of the most significant difficulties [1]. The dust and granular regolith will challenge materials, machines, and people. Our experience with dust-covered astronauts on the Moon and with landers and rovers on Mars suggests that significant efforts will be needed to sustain human exploration in this hostile environment. In 2002, the National Research Council examined precursor measurements required for the safe human exploration of Mars [2]. They recommended "NASA should determine the adhesive properties of Martian soil and airborne dust in order to evaluate the effects of dust adhesion on critical systems. This characterization must be conducted in situ by means of experiments to measure airborne dust adhesion."   Solar power, critical to long-term Martian exploration, is compromised by daily settling of dust on solar panel surfaces. The abrasive quality of the Martian soil, quantified during the Pathfinder Mission, is noted as another significant risk of exploration. Many physical health risks from Mars dust are also anticipated. Martian and Lunar dust simulants have shown pulmonary toxicity in laboratory tests of exposed mice [3]. Apollo astronauts experienced compromising effects of Lunar dust on their spacesuits and inside their lander, where dust irritated their eyes and lungs in the low gravity environment.  Research has shown smaller particulates can have an angle of repose, θr , that is affected by electrostatic interactions as well as environmental conditions [4]. Charging of Mars airborne particulates is likely, due to triboelectric or photoelectric processes, and electrical ground conduction at the Mars surface will be small with only trace water. Frictional forces on Mars will be 37.8% of those on Earth due to gravity, and this force change can contribute to modifying granular dynamics and statics on Mars, especially for larger particles and granules.  We previously observed repeating patterns of fine sand deposition on cylindrical and spherical surfaces and developed a novel approach to extract granular micromechanics data of Mars dust surrogates [5-6]; this data compares well with published results that use classical methods. Round surfaces have continuously increasing tangential angles for particle repose and can provide an approach for small particle, granular micromechanics study. Knowledge of the angle of repose of Martian dust and granular regolith, θr , will be useful in the design of exploration and support systems, and may provide a natural bulk dust removal technique for surfaces engineered beyond that angle. Increasing our knowledge of Martian granular dynamics is important considering the transport of surface materials for construction and harvesting of planetary minerals for sustainable exploration. A Mars dust angle of repose instrument was incorporated into the cancelled 2001 NASA Mars Surveyor Lander and the crash-landed 2003 ESA Beagle 2 Lander [7]. The overall goal of the research presented here is to test new approaches for understanding Mars dust dynamics and statics in laboratory simulations and for Mars lander configurations. We examine Mars Exploration Rover (MER) dust deposition images and laboratory data of regolith simulants to better understand Mars dust micromechanics.  Materials and Methods:  MER Pancam and calibration images were obtained from NASA. Image anlysis used image analysis software and the trigonometric model previously developed [5, 6]. Laboratory simulations used a Mars dust environmental chamber (MDEC) and methods previously described [8].  Figure 1. NASA Spirit MER Marsdial color image extracted from the panorama photograph taken from the summit of Husband Hill during sols 583 to 585 (August 24 to 26, 2005). Inset photo shows the reddish brown, apparent dust deposition cap. Image analysis used the elliptical planes shown for the extraction of dust deposition; θr = 52.3º from sin(θr) = m/d.  Results and Conclusions:  We have previously demonstrated the vailidity of using round surfaces in dust deposition analysis. Small spheres have the capability to yield information about θr and surface adhesion properties of different materials [5, 6, 8].   MER image analysis.  Figure 1 shows Mars dust adhesion on the gnomon of the Spirit MER Marsdial. The aluminum gnomon, or central spire of the Marsdial, is 4.4 cm tall and is tipped with a 2 cm sphere. To avoid camera glare, the anodized gnomon was painted with non-reflective black paint. The clearly reddishbrown dust cap deposition of Figure 1 appears to streak left-to-right and it is accompanied by a significant, but separate, vertical reddish-brown deposition shadow on the left side of the gnomon.  This observation suggests particulates adhere due to either surface attraction or dynamic embedding into the painted surface during a significant wind event. The dust cap streak appears to "weathervane" in the direction opposite to the vertical adhesion side. Regolith particulate appears to also have collected in the protected areas to the right of the base. Analysis of many images with shadows and direct sunlight also suggests that frost is not a direct contributing factor to the image patterns. In our analysis of Marsdial calibration images over hundreds of sols, the angle of the sun does not appear to modify the dust patterns, which can also be seen in the shadow of the gnomon sphere under backlit conditions.     Image analysis of the Spirit Marsdial deposition in Figure 1 yields θr = 52.3º. A similar analysis for the Opportunity MER Marsdial shows apparent side and top dust deposition on images from sol 594 taken with the Pancam and 753 nm bandpass filter. The calculated dust cap θr by image analysis is 51.2º for this deposition. Figure 2 shows the apparent extinction of light reflection Spirit sol 583 Pancam calibration images of the Marsdial using the 432 nm and 753 nm bandpass filters.   MDEC image analysis.  Figure 3 shows an MDEC trial using a 700 nm camera filter and red-IR lighting, at -5.7 ºC with CO2 airborne deposition of < 100 µm fraction JSC Mars-1 dust simulant on a gnomon sphere surrogate. We observe dust mineral reflectance similar to the MER Pancam images taken with > 500 nm filters. The calculated θr  = 56.4º in this experiment.  We conclude that a spherical instrument yields micromechanics data for small particles. We observe Mars dust may have significant adhesion potential on some dielectric surfaces as demonstrated by θr  > 50º.  References: [1] Kahn, R. A., et al., in Mars Kieffer, H. H., et al., Ed. (Univ. of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, 1992) 1017-1053. [2] Safe on Mars: Precursor Measurements Necessary to Support Human Operations on the Martian Surface (National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2002) 20. [3] Lam, C. W., et al. (2002) Inhalation Toxicology, 14, 901. [4] Sternovsky, Z., et al. (2002) J. Geophys. Res.-Planets, 107, 5105. [5] Möller, L. E. et al. (2002), LPSC XXXIII Abstract #2015. [6] Möller, L. E. et al. (2003) LPSC XXXIV Abstract #1562. [7] Chicarro, A., et al. (2003)  The Mars Express Mission: An Overview, 8,  http://sci.esa.int/sciencee/www/object/doc.cfm?fobject id=35549 (9/20/2005). [8] Möller, L. E. et al. (2004) LPSC XXXV Abstract #1773.   Figure 3.  MDEC validation trial of surrogate Marsdial dust deposition behavior using < 100 µm fraction JSC Mars-1 dust simulant (102 kPa CO2, -5.7 ºC, <10 mg H2O/m 3). Airborne deposition on a sphere coated with non-reflective black paint (top view, d = 32 mm). Black and white video-graph obtained using a 700 nm bandpass filter (80 nm FWHM) and red-IR lighting. JSC Mars-1 dust simulant is seen as the white dust cap in the image. Calculated θr = 56.4º for this trial.    Figure 2.  Spirit sol 583 Pancam calibration images of the Marsdial using the 432 nm and 753 nm bandpass filters. The 432 nm image (left) shows extinction of the light reflection from the apparent dust deposition observed on the top and left side of the gnomon in the 753 nm image (right). Accumulated dust is seen to the right of the Marsdial base consistent with the color image in Figure 1 from the same period. 
