 WET CHEMISTRY ANALYSIS OF EVAPORITES, RED-OX COUPLES, AND DISSOLVED SULFATE ON THE 2007 PHOENIX MARS SCOUT MISSION.  S.M.M. Young1, S.P. Kounaves1, M.H. Hecht2, The Tufts MECA-WCL team (C.A. Cable, J.A.M. Kapit, K. Gospidinova, S. Stroble, P. Chang), and The Phoenix  Science Team. 1In-Situ Planetary Chemical Analysis Lab,  Department of Chemistry, Tufts University, 62 Talbot Avenue, Medford, MA  02155 USA; suzanne.young@tufts.edu. 2Jet Propulsion Laboratory, M/S 302-231, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109 USA.  Introduction:  The 2007 Phoenix Mars Scout lander launches in August of 2007 with the intent to touch down at the high northern latitudes of Mars, between 65-72°N. Extensive images will be acquired. Atmospheric conditions will be monitored. Using a robotic arm, samples of soil and ice will be collected, and delivered to payload instruments for analysis. A major goal of the Phoenix mission is to unravel the history of Martian water in all its phases and the record left in the geochemistry of the regolith. In addition, Phoenix will address biohabitability by identifying potential chemical energy sources available to support life, determining whether the subsurface geochemistry is hostile to life, and identifying the potential of the geochemical environment to preserve paleontological evidence.  The Wet Chemistry Lab:  Phoenix carries with it a variety of analytical instruments (soon to be published in a special JGR issue) to analyze and interpret the chemical record. One instrument helping us to understand the chemical and mineralogical record will be MECA-WCL (Microscopy, Electrochemistry, and Conductivity Analyzer - Wet Chemistry Labs).  It includes four single-use independent wet chemistry labs.    Each WCL is composed of an upper assembly consisting of a reservoir of leaching solution (water and the first calibrants for the sensors), a 1cc sample drawer, and a reagent dispenser with five teflon coated SS crucibles.  The crucibles include, in solid form, a second calibrant, an acid, and barium chloride for determination of sulfate.   The lower WCL assembly consists of  an array of electrochemically-based sensors for measuring pH, Eh, conductivity, cyclic voltammetry, chronopotentiometry, anodic stripping voltammetry, and dissolved ionic species via ion selective electrodes (ISE) of Na+, K+, Mg2+ ,Ca2+, Ba2+, NH4 +, Cl-, Br-, I-, and NO3 -.       During a MECA-WCL sol, the initial leaching solution, containing 10e-5 M nitrate, bicarbonate, or chloride salts of Na+, K+, Mg2+ Ca2+, Ba2+, and NH4 + is delivered into the beaker of electrodes to pre-condition the ISEs, as well as provide a first calibration point for the ISEs and pH electrodes. Next a second calibrant containing 2x10e-5 M of the same salts is added and measured to provide a second calibration point. MECA-WCL is then ready to receive and analyze a sample of Mars regolith from the robotic arm. The sample will be allowed to freeze overnight.  On a second MECAWCL sol, the acid will be added, data taken and then the sulfate will be determined. Evaporites:  The vast northern polar lowlands of Mars, where the Phoenix intends to land is known as Vastitas Borealis. It could contain a   chronological record of an area that may have contained significant amounts of water, the remnant evaporitic stratigraphy, deposits of volcanic eruptions, or the advances and retreats of the polar ice cap. Recently, the Mars Odyssey orbiter has shown the existence of large amounts of subsurface water ice in the northern latitudes, buried under several to a few tens of centimeters of dry regolith [1]. The Phoenix will provide ground truth of this observation. Additionally, the interactions between atmosphere, water, dust, and subsurface ice, in conjunction with the periodic changes of the ice/soil boundary, have likely produced unique chemical and mineralogical signatures in the regolith. Determination of Evaporites and Red-Ox Couples:  Once a sample of Mars regolith is delivered to the MECA-WCL unit, it is introduced to the leaching solution when the sample introduction drawer is closed. The ion selective electrodes (ISEs) measure the water-soluble species including Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, Cl-, Br-, I-, NO3 -, NH4 + (to monitor any ammonia contamination possibly caused by Phoenix landing thrusters),and Ba2+ (for determination of SO4 = ). Intermittently other measurements are made: redox species  are analyzed using cyclic voltammetry; halides are confirmed by chronopotentiometry; and heavy metals are measured by anodic stripping voltammetry. Sulfates:  Sulfate is of great significance in understanding both Mars' geochemistry and its ability to support past or present microbial life. Elemental sulfur has been detected on Mars through various x-ray methods, both in situ by Viking [2], Pathfinder [3], and two MERs [4,5], and most recently from orbit by OMEGA [6].  From this data it has been hypothesized that that the predominated form of the of sulfur is sulfate.  X-ray methods, though, can not resolve sulfur, from sulfide, sulfate, sulfite, or any other forms of sulfur.  A surface inspection is thus important to verify the existence of sulfate on Mars, and in addition to determine which cations are associated with the sulfate. Obtaining such data on Mars can be very challenging. Determination of Sulfate:  Design and fabrication of the MECA-WCL posed many challenges, but the lack of a viable sulfate specific sensor introduced even greater complications.  While a couple of sulfate ISEs have been demonstrated in solutions where all other anions were either absent or chemically or physically removed, their response in more complicated solutions is not at all sulfate selective. Thus, one could not obtain a reliable sulfate analysis of a "dirty" or regolith sample.   The WCL overcomes this analytical problem by using a sulfate removal system and a measurement of counter cation.  Barium and sulfate form an insoluble (even under acidic and basic conditions) precipitate of barium sulfate.  Thus, following the extensive analyses of the leached regolith sample, the final phase of the analysis will determine sulfate via a barium titration and the Ba2+ ISE. Three measured amounts of BaCl2 will be added to the dissolved sample.  The Ba2+ will react with the dissolved SO4 = and precipitate as BaSO4.  The Ba 2+ sensor will measure the remaining barium in solution, and by simple subtraction, provide how much  barium precipitated with the sulfate, i.e. how much sulfate was present.  With respect to the 1 gram sample of Mars regolith, the first barium addition can precipitate up to 5% sulfate, the second addition extends the measurement to 10%, and the third to 15%. Mars analogue test samples:  In preparation for the Phoenix mission, the complete electroanalytical method for determination of soluble ionic species, including sulfate, via the standard subtraction method using barium and the barium ISE, is being characterized with a variety of standard solutions, geological Earth samples, Mars simulants, and a Martian meteorite sample. We are determining a variety of sensor response characteristics such as the limits of detection, interferences, and other constraints imposed by the Martian environmental conditions.  In addition, we are developing a response library to aid in the interpretation of the returned data.   This presentation will demonstrate the analysis of salty, as well as carbonate indurated palagonite samples from Hawaii, tephra (jarostic, as well as smectite-rich) samples from Hawaii, and a sample of the Mars Shergottite Meteorite EETA79001.  These samples constitute the beginning of our "cataloguing" endeavor at Tufts University.    References: [1] Boynton, W. V. et al. (2002) Science, 297, 81-8. [2] Clark B. C. et al. (1982) JGR, 87, 10,059-10,067. [3] Rieder R. et al. (1997) Science, 278, 1771-1774. [4] Gallert R. (2004) Science, 305, 1829-832. [5] Rieder R. et al. (2004) Science, 306, 1746-1749. [6] Langevin Y. (2005) Science, 307, 1584-1586.   
