 REVISITING THE ROLE OF GALACTIC COSMIC RAY COSMOGENIC ISOTOPES IN MARTIAN NOBLE GAS SYSTEMATICS.     S. Edwards,  J. D. Gilmour and C. J. Ballentine. School of Earth Atmospheric and Environmental  Sciences,  The  University  of  Manchester,  Oxford  Road,  Manchester,  M13  9PL,  UK,  email  : Stephen.Edwards@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk. Introduction:  As the most atmophile of elements, noble  gases  provide  a  unique  tool  for  investigating planetary evolution, particularly since they also include the  daughter  isotopes  of  a  number  of  lithophile  elements.  On  the  dense  atmosphere  terrestrial  planets (Earth and Venus), noble gas systematics are dominated by a combination of hydrodynamically fractionated primordial noble gases of solar/meteoritic origin mixed with isotopes derived from a variety of radiogenic processes. Only the atmospheric helium system is spallation dominated, due to the rapid  atmospheric loss of helium isotopes to space. The situation on Mars is very different. The atmospheric density is low at ~15g/cm2, allowing an essentially unmodified galactic cosmic ray flux to reach the surface. As a result, unlike Earth and Venus, where the major spallation targets are carbon oxygen and nitrogen, the full range of lithophile elements are possible targets. The low total inventory of atmospheric  noble  gases  also  increases  the  potential impact  of  spallation derived isotopes.  A final  difference is that on Mars surface turnover is very slow, with major topographic features having lives of billions of years.  This means that time integrated muon production must be considered for near surface martian sample material which is deep enough to be shielded from primary cosmic rays and secondary cosmic  ray neutrons. This work will therefore reassess the impact of time integrated spallation noble gases on the atmosphere, in the light of more recent spacecraft observations of the martian regolith and examine the depth at which muon produced noble gases cease to be an important component. Method: Spallation driven production of a substantial fraction of martian atmospheric neon was first suggested by Yanagita and Imamura [1]. This role of spallation neon has been discussed by Lal [2], and the production of cosmogenic Ne, Ar, 80Kr, and 128Xe has been examined in detail by Rao et al [3] using both direct spallation  and neutron  capture  on  appropriate  parent isotopes. Rao et al assumed a Shergottite regolith composition, modified for high chlorine and bromine concentrations  in  the light  of  the Pathfinder  and Viking soil and rock analyses. Since the time of their work, orbiting gamma ray and infrared spectroscopy has indicated  a  more  evolved  mixed  basaltic  and  andesitic composition with the implication that  regolith spallation target elements, barium and the early lanthanides, are five to ten times more abundant than in the shergottite model. In addition Rao et al used a low, 0.5ppm, iodine  concentration.  However  in  an  arid,  oxidizing, photolytic environment  volatile  iodine  compounds in the  atmosphere  can  become fixed  in  desert  soils  as complex iodates. In the hyperarid Atacama desert, levels of 102-104 ppm are seen [4]. On earth, the volatile organic compound is primarily biogenic methyl iodide, but on Mars the volatile parent would be volcanically derived  hydrogen  iodide. Thick  lava  piles  exist  on mars, and their degassing on eruption would have provided large volumes of hydrogen iodide, as well as better known volcanic gases such as sulphurdioxide and the lighter hydrogen halides. The  model  used  is  simple,  based  on  a  300g/cm2 spallation  cumulative  depth  and  a  450g/cm2 neutron capture  cumulative  depth,  both  time  integrated  over 1Ga. This timestep was selected as a time period over which atmospheric density was too low to provide significant shielding for primary cosmic rays. The spallation and neutron capture figures of Hohenberg et al [5] were used. For simplicity, complete degassing of the regolith is assumed and the resulting GCR derived isotope  is  compared  with  modern  atmospheric  abundances. A 50% basalt, 50% andesite regolith composition with 100ppm iodine was used, and similar levels of chlorine and bromine enrichment to those utilised by Rao et al. Cosmic ray muon penetration depths are very high with effects observable at shielding depth of 105g/cm2. Cosmic ray muon production in the terrestrial setting has  been reviewed by Niederman [6],  and his  depth production curves are used to derive muon produced noble gas synthesis at varying depths for Mars. These are  then  compared  with  typical  3He  abundances  in modern terrestrial xenoliths. Integration times of 4Ga were assumed as atmospheric shielding would not be an issue unless the atmospheric density was more than 100 times present. Results and discussion:  The simple model confirms that modern martian atmospheric Ne may have a large spallation fraction in keeping with the findings of Lal and Rao et al. The high production of 80Kr and potential high atmospheric cosmogenic fraction found by Rao was reproduced. In addition this work examined spallation  produced  124Xe and  126Xe,  and  these  were found to have potentially high spallation components in the modern atmosphere. If an Atacama-like iodine con centration mechanism operated on Mars then a substantial  fraction of  the  modern  128Xe inventory could  be cosmogenic. In all cases assuming 100% regolith degassing, the high levels of spallation isotopes were sufficient  to form 5 percent or  more of the present day martian  atmospheric  inventory  (21Ne  50-250%,  22Ne 25%  80Kr 30-300%,  124Xe 6%,  126Xe 10%,  128Xe 80260% - where a range of values is given the discrepancy is probably due to differences in neutronics assumptions between sources). In reality these figures should be regarded as maximum values, as regolith degassing is unlikely to approach 100% efficiency, especially for deeper layers. Muon produced cosmogenic isotopes would be significant to a depth of 100 to 300m from the point of view of mantle xenolith noble gases (see figure).      The potential high spallation contribution to the martian atmosphere from regolith derived noble gases offers a unique tool to assess both atmospheric loss and regolith alteration/degassing on a billion year or more timescale. However, before this can be done, precise measurements of modern martian neon, argon, krypton and xenon isotopes are needed, together with regolith iodine.  This is because the Viking data lacked sufficient precision to accurately resolve certain isotopic ratios  of  interest,  while  martian  meteorites  have  been heavily overprinted by spallation isotopes acquired in transit, especially in the case of the lighter gases. Another significant implication is  that  the high possible spallation  component  in  certain  martian  atmospheric noble  gas  isotopes  indicates  that  caution  is  needed, both in making corrections for transit spallation gases, and for assessing the gradient of mass dependent hydrodynamic fractionation in Mars atmospheric evolution models that use a solar/meteoritic starting composition.      Determination  of martian mantle  3He/4He would give  an  interesting  insight  into  martian  primordial volatile retention, and the timing of such retention during the accretion of a terrestrial planet. Targeting of intrusive rocks at depths of a few metres or more should prevent  problems due  to  primary spallation  and  secondary  neutron  noble  gas  production.  Unfortunately the present work indicates that muon derived cosmogenic noble gases will be present in significant quantities  relative to  3He (and  21Ne) to depths of 100m or more. This makes sample retrieval of pristine xenoliths extremely difficult by conventional drilling. To obtain such samples  recent  landslide  scarps  or  crater  walls should  be  targeted.  Vertical  mini-tunnel  boring-like machines  in  unlined  self  supporting  holes  could  be considered,  as  could  explosive  formation  of  a  sufficiently deep crater. Sampling of crushed and uncrushed specimen gases may also help in separating post-crystallisation spallation noble  gases from fluid inclusion hosted pre-crystallisation gases. Also, if a young intrusive could be identified, it would alleviate many of the muon related problems. References:  [1] Yanagita  S.  and  Imamura  M. (1978) Nature 274, 234-235. [2] Lal D. (1992) GCA, 57, 4627-4637. [3] Rao M. N. et al (2002) Icarus 156, 352372.  [4]Greenwood  N.N.  and  Earnshaw  A.  (1997) Chemistry of the elements 2nd Ed.  [5] Hohenberg C. M. et al (1978) Proc. Lunar. Planet. Sci. Conf. 9th. [6] Niederman (2002) Rev. Mineral.Geochem. 47. [7] Stuart et al (2003) Nature, 424, 57-59. [8] Ballentine C.J. and Burnard P.G. (2002) Rev. Mineral.Geochem. 47. The solid purple curves in the graph below shows the time integrated muon production of 21Ne, the blue of 3He. The  horizontal dashed blue lines show typical terrestrial mantle  xenolith high and low 3He ranges (based on experimental  values in [7]) .The dashed horizontal purple line shows 4Ga of time integrated mantle radiogenic 21Ne taken from [8] . 
