 MASS EJECTED FROM MARTIAN DUST DEVILS AS A FUNCTION OF HEIGHT AND DUST DEVIL MORPHOLOGY.  N. W. Hall1 and M. T. Lemmon2,  1Dept.  of Atmospheric  Science,  Texas A&M University (nhall@ariel.met.tamu.edu), 2Dept. of Atmospheric Sceince, Texas A&M University (lemmon@tamu.edu). Introduction: An important question in the study of the Martian atmosphere is how much dust is added to  the  atmosphere  by  dust  devils.  In  this  study  we examine  images  of  dust  devils  from  the  Mars Exploration  Rover  (MER)  mission  to  determine  the upward mass flux of dust in the Martian atmosphere, due  to  dust  devil  activity,  as  a  function  of  height. Thus,  we  find  expressions  for  both  the  quantity  of dust  lifted  from  the  surface  by  dust  devils  and  the height  distribution of  its  exit  from the  vortices.  We also examine  the  morphology of dust  devils  imaged by  the  rovers  to  determine  whether  it  correlates significantly with upward dust mass flux or the height distribution  for  dust  devil  mass  loss  to  the atmosphere. Discussion: Data and observations. The data set is comprised  of  images  taken  by  the  Spirit and Opportunity cameras between sols 455 and 715. Each imaged  dust  devil  is  examined  by  hand  to  find  its width at three points: its intersection with the ground, the horizon, and the top of the visible disturbance, all in pixels. The height of each dust devil, as well as all observed dust devil genisis and dissipation events are also  recorded.  Each  continuous  dust  devil  is numbered so that the resultant data can later be sorted by  individual  dust  devil  identity  or  any  of  the measured  characteristics.  The  distance  of  the  dust devil  from  the  camera  is  estimated  by  use  of landmarks in the surrounding terrain as described by Greeley  et.  al.  [1].  Given  the  distance  from  the camera, all the lengths measured above in pixels can be given in meters. Analysis of dust devil geometry.  This information is  fitted  to  an  assumed  quasiconical  shape  passing through the three heights at which dust devil width is measured, generating a unique estimated geometry for each  dust  devil  observation.  The  geometry  of  each dust devil is parameterized by deviation from that of a cylinder with the same height as the dust devil and the same diameter as the observed width of the dust devil at the surface. Estimation of dust devil mass and vertical velocity  distributions. Material  in dust devils  usually appears lighter  than  the  material  on  the  ground  and  darker than the background radiance of the Martian sky. The optical  depth  of  the  dust  may  be  determined  by comparison  to  these  background  states.  While  the optical  properties of dust particles are likely to vary somewhat  with  the  terrain  over  which  a  dust  devil passes,  estimates  are  available  for  the  relationship between the optical depth of a pixel and the mass of dust interposed between the camera  and the edge of the atmosphere, or the ground, respectively.[1]  In our study, these optical  depths are averaged horizontally and  evaluated  vertically.  This  process  yields  a continuous vertical  distribution of dust devil mass at the time of each examined photograph, running from the ground to the top of the disturbance—a plot of M against z. Renno et al. [2] and Ferri et al. [3] have modeled the updraft velocities within Martian dust devils to be near  15 m/s and 20 m/s respectively.  Greeley  et  al. have  subsequently  described  a  process  for determining vertical  velocities in Martian dust devils by tracking the progress of identifiable features from one image to the next.[1] We use a variation on this idea.  For this analysis,  we simplify the  situation  by assuming that the dust particles are small enough that they follow the flow in which they are embedded, and that the upward velocity in each dust devil is constant. When subsequent  images of the same dust devil  are available, we perform the analysis described above to get  a  second  snapshot  of  the  vertical  mass distribution.  The  vertical  mass  distribution  at  each time  should have  irregular  peaks  and valleys  which move upward within the disturbance at some constant speed. This information, together with knowledge of the time elapsed between images, would allow for an estimation  of  upward  velocity  in  an  observed  dust devil by charting the progress of such irregularities in the  curve.  Rather  than  rely  on  a  few  specific identifiable  features,  however,  we take advantage  of the  fact  that  our  mass  distribution  is  continuous  by simply displacing the mass distribution from the latter image  downward  until  it  is  in  best  agreement  with that  of  the  former.  The  length  of  the  displacement needed  to  achieve  this  yields  the  vertical  velocity. From the vertical  velocity  and mass distribution,  we may  determine  the  vertical  mass  flux  through  any horizontal cross section of the dust devil. We can also find out the quantity of 'new mass' that  has entered the dust devil between images, which is just the mass contained in the dust devil below the height given by the applied displacement. Determination of mass ejected  from the vorticies  per unit  time as a function  of  height.  It  is expected that mass enters dust devils near their bases and exits them  at  higher  altitudes.  Thus  their  vertical  mass distributions  tend to attenuate  with height.  For each dust  devil  there  is  some  attenuation  function  that describes mass loss through the sides of the dust devil column into the atmosphere. We use the conservation of  mass  to  determine  this  function,  given  vertical velocities and at least two images for each dust devil. Suppose that  a  dust  devil  is imaged at  times  T1 and  T2,  yielding  vertical  mass  distributions  M1  and M2 and vertical velocity  V. Since mass is conserved, the mass flux to the atmosphere between T1 and T2 is the difference between the observed mass distribution M2 and  the  mass  distribution  that  would  have obtained if no loss to the atmosphere had taken place, M2*.  M2* may be determined by simply shifting M1 upward along the z-axis a distance  V x  (T2-T1). The mass flux through the side of the dust-devil  column over  the  time  interval  is  then  found  by  subtracting M2* from M2 (after integrating the distributions over z to get total mass rather than a mass distribution). In  our  measurements  we  have  already  averaged mass horizontally, so changes in optical depth due to widening  or  narrowing  of  the  dust  devil  column, either  with  height  or  over  time,  are  accounted  for. However,  even  assuming  constant  overall  vertical velocity  within  the  dust  devil,  there  is  likely  to  be some relaxation  in the mass distribution with height due  to  diffusive  forces.  A corrective  factor  may  be applied to M2* to account for this. With multiple successive images of the same dust devil, it is possible to use this technique to reconstruct the rate of mass ejection as a function of height. This is  done  by  observing  a  selected  region  of  the  dust devil  as  it  proceeds  upward  over  several  time increments. After calculating the vertical velocity, we can  then  determine  the  mass  lost  over  each  time interval  by  the  method  described  above.  Since  we know the height of the selected region at the time of each measurement from the vertical velocity, we also know over  what  interval  in  vertical  space  the  mass was lost. The uncertainty of this result depends on the number and frequency of images used. Correlation of  mass loss to cylindrical  and noncylindrical morphologies. It is possible that the height distribution of dust devil mass loss to the atmosphere is  related  to  the  geometry  of  the  dust  devil.  To investigate  this possibility,  the dust  devils  examined in this study are characterized by their deviation from the  cylindrical  shape.  We  determine  the  degree  of corrolation  between  deviation  from  a  cylinder  and vertical  velocity,  as  well  as  the  mass  attenuation factor. Summary:  Numerous  Martian  dust  devils  are analyzed  to  determine  their  size,  morphology  and density  distributions.  The  vertical  velocity  of  dust particles in dust devils is estimated. The conservation of mass is utilized  to develop  an expression for  the density  distribution  of  dust  leaving  Martian  dust devils  and  entering  the  general  atmosphere  as  a function  of  height.  These  results  are  compared  to other  estimates  of  the  dust  distribution  due  to  dust devils.  An analysis  is  also  carried  out  to  determine whether  dust  transport  varies  as  a  function  of  dust devil  morphology  in  terms  of  deviation  from  the cylindrical  shape.  A  data  set  containing  dust  devil heights,  geometries,  and  optical  contrast  levels  is provided for future work in the field. Future  Work:  More  complete  analysis  of  the  morphology  dependence.  The  categorization  of  dust devil  geometry  only  in  terms  of  deviation  from  a cylindrical  shape  is  probably  too  imprecise  to  fully express  the  dependence  of  the  mass  transport characteristics  of  dust  devils  on their  morphologies. Dust devils vary not only in overall shape, but in mass and  velocity  distributions  within  the  bounds  of  the observed shape.  Further studies may attempt  a more more rigorous analysis of dust-devil morphology and how it changes. Determination  of  settling  velocities. Once  the amount  of dust  entering the atmosphere  due to dust devil activity is determined, the next logical question is how long it takes for the dust to settle out. Future studies may use the optical properties of  dust devils, along with an analysis of the source regions of their particles,  to  estimate  the  settling  velocities  of particles ejected from them. Once good estimates of mass  transport  and  settling  rates  are  available,  the concentration of dust in the Martian atmosphere due to dust devils may be determined. References: [1] Greeley, R., P. L. Whelley, R. E. Arvidson, N. A. Cabrol, D. J. Foley, B. J. Franklin, P. G. Geissler, M. P. Golombek, R. O. Kuzmin, G. A. Landis, M. T. Lemmon, L. D. V. Neakrase, S. W. Squyres, and S. D. Thompson (2006), Active dust devils in Gusev Crater, Mars: observation from the Mars Exploration Rover, Spirit, J. Geophys. Res.,  doi:10.1029/ 2006JE002743. [2] Renno´ , N. O., A. A. Nash, J. Lunine, and J. Murphy (2000), Martian and terrestrial dust devils: Test of a scaling theory using Pathfinder data, J. Geophys. Res., 105(E1),  1859-1866. [3] Ferri, F., P. H. Smith, M. Lemmon, and N. O. Renno´ (2003), Dust devils as observed by Mars Pathfinder, J. Geophys. Res., 108(E12), 5133, doi:10.1029/2000JE001421. 
