 WIDESPREAD AND EPISODIC SEDIMENTATION IN THE NORTHERN PLAINS OF MARS.  M. R. Salvatore 1 and P. R. Christensen 1, 1 School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, 201 E. Orange Mall, Tempe, AZ 85287-6305, msalvatore@asu.edu.  Introduction: The circum-Chryse outflow channels are some of the most impressive fluvial features on Mars, and are interpreted to be the result of catastrophic and punctuated groundwater-fed overland flow [1]. However, despite their deep incision into the martian crust, the deposits associated with these massive channels have never been definitively identified. Here, we present evidence for widespread, high-albedo, sedimentary deposits in the shallow subsurface of Chryse and Acidalia Planitiae that appear to be genetically linked to the circum-Chryse outflow channels [2]. Impact craters are used as probes to investigate the shallow subsurface and document the distribution and stratigraphy of this unit, which helps to constrain the depositional environment, episodicity, and timing of outflow channel activity. Distribution: Using high resolution imaging datasets (< 5 m pix -1 ), we have identified evidence for a competent stratigraphic unit throughout the shallow subsurface of Chryse and Acidalia Planitiae in 219 of 415 (52.8%) of analyzed craters. Positive identifications span the full range of latitudes (18º N to 50º N), longitudes (317º E to 360º E), elevations (-3500 m to -4500 m), and crater diameters (1 km to 41 km) included in this study. The northernmost extent of this unit is obscured by latitudedependent mantling [3]. The best exposed deposits occur along the shallow topographic gradient between Chryse and Acidalia Planitiae, where exposures are several hundreds of meters thick. Along the southern and western margins of Chryse Planitia, in a region also corresponding to the highest regional elevation, this unit appears to be thin and disrupted, although it contains clear morphological similarities to the better exposed strata towards the center of the Chryse and Acidalia basins. Morphology: The morphologies associated with this sedimentary unit can be separated into two end members. Along the margin of Chryse basin, the unit appears thin and discontinuous, with discrete sedimentary packages of thinly stratified horizontal beds and blocky high-albedo materials set within a series of thick, low albedo layers (Fig. 1). Towards the center of Chryse and Acidalia Planitiae, this unit consists of massive, resistant, cliffforming high-albedo materials that are interbedded with less resistant low-albedo strata (Fig. 2). Meter- to submeter-scale layering is regionally observed, down to the maximum image resolutions. Evidence of lensing and pinching is also observed in several exposures. Mineralogy: The mineralogy of this unit was investigated in several locales using the Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM) instrument. The high-albedo unit exhibits slightly stronger 3.0  Figure 1. Evidence for high-energy sedimentary deposition in western Chryse Planitia. Fine-scale layering, blocky high-albedo materials, and low-albedo layers are indicated by black, grey, and white arrows, respectively.  Figure 2. Evidence for low-energy sedimentary deposition in northern Chryse Planitia. Fine-scale layering and apparent lensing and pinching morphologies are indicated by white, grey, and black arrows, respectively. µm band depths than surrounding materials, suggesting the presence of either structural and/or adsorbed H2O and/or OH , although neither overtones nor combination tones of H2O or OH  are observed. Aside from the enhanced 3.0 µm absorption and high albedo, this unit does not exhibit any diagnostic spectral signatures. Low-albedo units containing olivine and pyroxene are often found both above and below the high-albedo unit in crater walls (Fig. 3). This observed vertical distribution is interpreted as the preservation of overturned stratigraphy in crater walls, as was previously suggested in this region [4]. The presence of mafic materials in both the floor material and ejecta of many craters confirms that these mafic materials are stratigraphically lower than the highalbedo sedimentary units. Interpretation: The depositional morphologies and elevated hydration signature observed in these sedimentary units suggest liquid water was involved in their formation. Based on the observed morphologies, the western and southern margins of Chryse Planitia were likely dominated by high-energy depositional environments, while low-energy environments dominated north and east towards Acidalia Planitia. Similar depositional settings and morphologies have been identified on Earth in both subaqueous [5] and subaerial [6] fluvial environments, where large quantities of water were involved in their formation. The relationship between the observed spatial distribution of this unit and the interpreted variations in depositional environments strongly suggest an origin from the circum-Chryse outflow channels. This formation hypothesis is also consistent with an aqueous formation mechanism for the sedimentary deposits. Later outflow channel activity may have obscured these earlier sedimentary deposits with poorly sorted and boulder-laden sediments, similar to those observed by Mars Pathfinder [7]. Stratigraphic relationships observed in crater walls are used to elucidate the geologic history of Chryse and Acidalia Planitiae. Sedimentary deposits are stratigraphically higher than the observed mafic compositions. As such, some (if not all) outflow channel activity occurred following the widespread emplacement of olivine- and pyroxene-bearing materials. What is the composition of the high-albedo sedimentary materials? With the exception of the slightly stronger 3.0 µm band depths, these sedimentary units are spectrally unremarkable and comparable to much of the regional terrains south of Chryse Planitia. The overall higher albedo of these sedimentary units likely reflects the addition of a spectrally neutral dust component, also common both south and west of Chryse Planitia. Additionally, the absence of crystalline and/or amorphous alteration products suggests that, while essential in the transportation and deposition of the sedimentary units, liquid water was not efficient in the chemical weathering of this material. Conclusions: The morphologies, distribution, and spectral signatures of this high-albedo stratigraphic unit are consistent with the transport and deposition of sedimentary materials via the circum-Chryse outflow channels. This marks the first identification of in-place sedimentary deposits associated with the outflow channels. On Earth, low-energy subaerial and subaqueous depositional environments are ideal for the preservation of fossilized organics [8]. Should organics have existed on the martian surface, these rapidly deposited and buried sediments may have preserved such evidence, and should be considered for future in situ investigations.  References: [1] Carr M. H. (1987) Nature, 326, 3035. [2] Salvatore M. R. and Christensen P. R. (2014) Geology, in review. [3] Mustard J. F. et al. (2001) Nature, 412, 411-414. [4] Salvatore M. R. et al. (2010) JGR, 115, doi:10.1029/2009JE003519. [5] Kneller B. et al. (2004) GSA Bulletin, 116, doi:10.1130/B25242.1. [6] Nichols G. J. and Fisher J. A. (2007) Sed. Geol., 195, 75-90. [7] McSween H. Y. et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 8679-8716. [8] Gabbott S. E. et al. (2001) ELS, doi:10.1038/npg.els.0001622. [9] Pelkey S. M. et al. (2007) JGR, 112, doi:10.1029/2006JE002831.   Figure 3.  Subset of CRISM parameter image FRT000190B8, with olivine (OLINDEX2 [4]) and highCa pyroxene (HCPINDEX [9]) represented by red and green, respectively.  The dark band indicated by the white arrow shows the location of the high-albedo outcrops, which lack strong mineralogic absorptions.  The grey arrow shows an olivine- and pyroxene-rich subsurface layer exposed stratigraphically below the high-albedo unit and in the overturned ejecta material. 
