 PLANETARY SCIENCE SYNTHESIS EDUCATION USING STRUCTURAL HIERARCHY FOR MARTIAN MATERIALS. Sz. Bérczi 1, S. Józsa 2 , T. Varga 3, I. Gyollai 4, Sz. Nagy 4. 1 Eötvös University, Dept. Materials Physics, H-1117, Budapest, Pázmány P. s. 1/a. Hungary (bercziszani@caesar.elte.hu), 2 Eötvös University, Dept. of Petrology and Geochemistry. H-1117, Budapest, Pázmány P. s. 1/c. 3 VTPatent Kft. H-1111 Budapest, Bertalan L. u. 20. Hungary, 4 University of Szeged, Department of Mineralogy, Petrology and Geochemistry, H-6722 Szeged, Hungary.  Summary: We continued planetary synthesis educational program which was began last year by NASA lunar set. This year we arranged some important martian events into a structural hierarchy multilevel system and frame. Although the evolutionary steps are distinctly separated, this way martian planetary evolution can be demonstrated with various measurements: stratigraphy (USGS maps), imaging of surface layers (Viking, MGS, MEX, MRO images), hand specimen meteorite samples, rover surface observations and thin sections (NASA and NIPR collections). (Table. 1.)   Table 1. Parallel studies of the meteorite and rover samples with geomorphology in multihierarchical framework system.     Scale  Cosmic effects, mostly impacts (MARS)  Inner layers, mostly volcanism (MARS) Transported material in the atmosphere (dust or rocks in water) (MARS) Solving material from the atmosphere or surface (MARS) Planetary morpho-logy    Images taken by orbital space probe   Impact, ejecta blanket, layers    Argyre, Viking Lava layer in Elysium basin    MRO image Transported superponed sediments     Karst morphology     Images and measurements by a lander  Fragmented material on the surface broken by impact   Opportunity image Extrusive lava layer column fragment on Mars     Spirit image Flood trasported rocks arranged around Pathfinder   Pathfinder image Karst-like sinkhole depressson chain in the „Anatolia"-region   Opportunity image   Observa-tion of the fine texture of the surface rock  Close up image rock text, crystals    Curiosity image  Sedimentary cemented rock    Curiosity image Solved out materials      Opportunity image    Rock hand specimen - Martian metorite    Orthopyroxenite Antarctic meteorite  ALH84001  Shergottite Antarctic meteorite  ALH77005  No sedimentary meteorite accepted yet   No sedimentary meteorite accepted yet   Thin section of the specimen     Orthopyroxenite  ALH84001  Shergottite  ALH77005      Introduction: This year a hierarchy level arrangement of the martian events were placed into focus together with martian meteorites and rover surface results.  Structural hierarchy for planetary research Structural hierarchy provides a systematic which unifies the levels from deep in materials up to planetary levels, on the basis of embedding structures (Fig.1.)    Fig. 1. Multi-hierarchical teaching strategy: Structural hierarchy table for planetary materials [2] We followed the structural column according to the structural (separate and rebuild) hierarchy. Selected examples were pyroxenite (ALHA83001) and a shergottite (ALHA77005). We also followed the hierarchical sequence with the measurement methods. Such series of the structural hierarchy framework was followed in several cases, where we had MGS, MEX and MRO images, corresponding USGS stratigraphical maps, martian meteorite samples, and thin section with a more or less corresponding surface material and mineral components.  Multi-hierarchical teaching strategy: In the hierarchy sequence framework students can connect structural levels (vertically) and processes (horizontal way). Studies on structural hierarchy of materials [1], were extended to the corresponding analog planetary and industrial processes [2] this year we focused our studies on the overview of the structural hierarchy of planetary materials from large scale ones (stratigraphic units) down to the mineral composition of the lunar samples. This vertical view (a complex concept in teaching [9]) played important role in cross-weaving the knowledge of students on planetary processes, evolution, materials.  References: [1] Kabai, S., Bérczi Sz. (2004): 35th LPSC, #1081; [2] Sz. Bérczi, Gy. Hudoba, A. Lang, T. P. Varga, S. Józsa, Gy. Szakmány, I. Erdélyi, D. Kiss, I. Nickl, T. Panyi, T. N. Varga, S. Hegyi, T.. Pataki. (2010): 41 st LPSC, #1358; [3] Sz. Bérczi, S. Józsa, S. Kabai, I. Kubovics, Z. Puskás, Gy. Szakmány. (1999): NASA Lunar Sample Set in Forming Complex Concepts in Petrography and Planetary Petrology. In Lunar and Planetary Science XXX, #1038, Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston (CD-ROM) 
