 SUMMARIZED EVOLUTION OF MARS. J.M. Dohm1; 1Dept. of Space Exploration & Discovery, Univ. Museum, Univ. Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan,  113-0033 (jmd@um.u-tokyo.ac.jp)  Introduction: The evolution of Mars is summarized here informed through key geologic information concerning Mars' and Earth's evolution combined with relatively new theories about planetary formation and the formation, evolution, and composition of the solar system. This includes a Martian landscape which records an interaction among internal (energy conditions, compositions, and structures), subaerial (surface compositions, structures, and environmental conditions), and atmospheric (composition and dynamics) elements through time, ever changing partly due to planetary size (nearly half that of the Earth), solar/extrasolar (including Sun, asteroids, and comets) activity, and variations in planetary obliquity. Primary features of the Martian landscape include the following: (1) the northern lowlands (the great "oceanic" basin of Mars, including the site of ancient oceans); (2) the southern cratered highlands "supercontinent"; (3) the hemispheric dichotomy boundary that separates (1) and (2); (4) Tharsis as well as lesser volcanic provinces including Elysium; (5) large impact crater basins (including Hellas, Chryse, Isidis, and Argyre); (6) polar ice caps; and (7) fluvial-, glacial, periglacial-, lacustrine-, marine-, and aeolian-modified landscapes, which include those that indicate a continued active planetary system, both endogenic and exogenic. The modern day Martian landscape, which includes these major features (many shown in Fig. 1) is an expression of the major stages of Martian geological evolution summarized in the following. Major stages of Martian geological evolution: Updated from the geological theory reported by [1], Mars generally comprises six major stages of geological evolution. These are (from oldest to youngest and abbreviated): Stage 1 - shortly after accretion, a relatively dry Mars differentiates from a magma ocean, which includes the formation of a primordial crust with composition that includes anorthosite, KREEP, and komatiite layers [for details see 2]; Stage 2 - Mars is impacted by asteroids and comets which deliver an ocean-atmosphere system to its planetary system, perturbs the solid lid of the solidified magma ocean, and initiates proto-plate tectonic activity around 4.37 Ga to 4.2 Ga in accordance with the ABEL model proposed by [3]; in addition the dynamo initiates sometime during Stages 1-2; Stage 3 - accretion of thickened, continental crust and subduction of hydrated oceanic crust to the mantle boundary layer and lower mantle of Mars occurs, including the development of the felsic crustal basement Martian supercontinent (i.e., the southern highlands), which includes extensive serpentinite marked by the magnetic anomalies identified through the Mars Global Surveyor [2]; Stage 4 - the core dynamo stops during Noachian heavy bombardment with continued, waning plate tectonic activity; Stage 5 - Large basinforming impacts result in Hellas, Chryse, Isidis, and Argyre, the later phase of development of the Martian supercontinent including the termination of plate tectonic activity (estimated to have occurred between the Hellas and Argyre impact events, ~between 4.0 and 3.93 Ga) with significant anorthosite-rich primordial crust preserved, and the Tharsis superplume initiates with significant atmospheric thinning during this time; and Stage 6 - the superplume phase (stagnant-lid regime) of Martian planetary evolution prevails until present-day, with episodic phases of volcanism, water outflows, and related transient hydrological cycling and climate and environmental change which interrupts prevailing ice-house conditions. Modern day Mars records both endogenic- and exogenic-driven activity. These major stages of geological evolution provide explanation for many seemingly anomalous observations highlighted in the following (several shown in Fig. 1).   Fig. 1. MOLA topographic map showing major features and provinces, including Vikings 1 and 2 (V1 and V2, respectively), Pathfinder (PF), Spirit and Opportunity (S and M, respectively), Phoenix (PH), and Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) landing sites, circum-Chryse outflow channels (dark blue arrows), Uzboi drainage (dark gray arrow), major glacial routes (light blue arrows), hypothesized Tharsis paleobasin (solid blue line), major structures inferred to represent parts of plate boundaries (dashed black lines), and the Tharsis/Elysium corridor (white dashed line; discussed in subsequent chapters, this is a tract of Martian land that may link Tharsis with Elysium, including relatively youthful geological activity). Also shown are the Thaumasia Highlands mountain range (T.H.; dark patch), which includes its northwest prominent massif, Claritas Rise (violet circle), and Coprates Rise mountain range (C.R.; dark patch), heavily modified parts of the Hellas, Isidis, and Argyre impact basins and (medium dark patches), hypothesized ancient (> 4.0 Ga) impact basin of Arabia Terra ([4]; medium dark patch), hypothesized Utopia impact basin (violet dashed line), and Tharsis, Elysium, Tyrrhenus/Hadriacus, Malea Planum, and Syrtis Major, and Apollinaris volcanic provinces (light patches). The extent (equipotential surface) of the Noachian ocean is hypothesized to have been above datum (zero elevation, approximating the transitional color region of green and yellow), including locating above the Opportunity landing site in Meridiani (M) [5]. The equipotential surface has been modified by activities including thermal isostasy [6] and lithospheric rebound due to water unloading associated with the disappearance of an ocean [7]. The Malea Planum and Tyrrhenus/Hadriacus volcanic provinces partly infill paleovalleys (blue arrows marking their trend and central parts), possible the result of glaciation and/or tectonics. Discovery sites (red circles with white numbers) include: (1) possible TTG (granite and andesite), (1/2) possible TTG (granite and andesite) and/or anorthosite, (2) possible anorthosite, (3) possible ophiolite, (5) hematite spherules (blueberries), (6) serpentine, (7) carbonate, (8) zeolite, and (9) chlorite. Many of the locations of serpentine combine with carbonate among other minerals [8 and references therein]). Some of the most mineralogically diverse locales yet identified on Mars include Claritas Rise, Warrego Rise, and the intersection of the Thaumasia Plateau, northern tip of the Coprates Rise mountain range, and eastern Valles (yellow circle), where major tectonic activity and magma-water interactions are observed [8 and references therein]. Prime targets for future exploration are shown by black outlined white arrows, including: Abus Vallis (AV), Apollinaris Mons (AM), Argyre basin (AB), Arabia Terra-Syrtis Major boundary (ATS), Central Elysium (CE), Claritas Rise (Cl.R.), Eberswalde Delta (ED), Melas Chasma (MC), Phlegra Montes (PM), and Terra Sirenum (TS). Examples of anomalous observations expressed through Mars's nature including the major stages of geological evolution:  Based (and updated) from [1], anomalous observations, which include those shown in Fig. 1, may be explained by the major stages of Martian geological evolution in terms of their many consequences, consistency with the planetary geological history, internal coherence, and consilience with new data from on-going missions. They include (with interpretation highlighted in blue): (1) extensive anorthosite [9] (primordial crust of a solidified magma ocean [2]), such as exposures near the base of the walls of Valles Marineris [8]; (2) felsic crustal materials [10,11] (ancient crustal basement resulting from plate tectonics including subduction and the production of granite); (3) varying crustal thickness and bimodal topography [1] (ancient plate tectonics with the southern highlands representative of a supercontinent and the northern lowlands an oceanic basin covered by diverse materials including ancient felsic crustal basement materials from the southern highlands via outflow channel activity); (4) relatively low density materials of the southern highlands [12] (felsic crustal basement formed by plate tectonics); (5) distinct remanent magnetic signatures (serpentinite formed during the development of the supercontinent when the dynamo was still active, which included the almagamation of continents and the suturing of oceanic basins [2]); (6) large (some reaching > 1,000 km in length) structures resulting from contraction and extension, which include Tanais Fossae, structurally-controlled basins such as highlighted in Terra Cimmeria [13], Marianas-trench-like feature along the western margin of Terra Sirenum, Phlegra Montes, and mountain ranges such as the Thaumasia Highlands and the Coprate Rise  (products of plate tectonics including those resulting from extension, transtension, and/or crustal shortening and orogenic-complex development, as well as exposure of Hadean-age-equivalent basement by uplift and differential erosion as in the case of the mountain ranges); (7) Basin & Range-like topography in Terra Sirenum [14;15] (major extension related to plate tectonics and the initial development of the Tharsis superplume); (8) the Thaumasia Plateau and surroundings comparing with the Colorado Plateau and Loess Plateau (Ordos Basin) of Earth and their surroundings [16,17] (products of plate tectonics including intraplate activity); (9) highly modified and deformed Hellas [18] compared to the more preserved Argyre impact structure (major changing planetary conditions between the two impact events, which include a thinning atmosphere and the shutdown of plate tectonics); and (10) long-lived (~ 4.0 Ga to modern day) Tharsis [1,19] (superplume formed through plate subduction, which included the transportation of water and other volatiles to the core-mantle boundary which later erupted during Tharsis-driven activity). Future exploration, testing of the hypothesized major stages of geological evolution, and implications: Methods used for research on Earth such as tomography and analyses of samples returned from known locations on Mars will detail (and likely significantly revise current understanding) the major stages of geological evolution hypothesized and presented here and in [1]. In addition to revealing its early evolution and life potential, the study of Mars will likely contribute well beyond itself to include potentially Hadean Earth and the origin of life. Mars, for example, had landmass, ocean, and a relatively thick atmosphere interacting through hydrological cycling driven by the Sun, Habitable-Trinity conditions important for life [20]. Thus, Mars is the best target to test the hypothesis that life exists beyond Earth.  References: [1] Baker VR et al., 2007, In Superplumes: Beyond plate tectonics: Springer, 507-523. [2] Dohm JM et al, 2017, Geos. Front., DOI: 10.1016/j.gsf.2016.12.003. [3] Maruyama S., Ebisuzaki T., 2017, Geos. Front., http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gsf.2016.10.005. [4] Dohm JM et al (2007) Icarus 190:74-92. [5] Fairén AG et al., 2003, Icarus 165:53-67. [6] Ruiz J et al., 2004, Planet Space Sci 52:12971301. [7] Leverington DW et al., 2004, J Geophys Res 109(E1). doi:10.1029/2003JE002141. [8] Viviano-Beck CE et al., 2016, Icarus, 10.1016/j.icarus.2016.09.005. [9] Carter, J., Poulet, F., 2013. Nature Geoscience 6: 1008-1012. [10] Wray, J.J. et al., 2013, Nature Geoscience 6:1013-1017. [11] Sautter, V. et al., 2015. Nature Geoscience, doi:10.1038/ngeo2474. [12] Baratoux D  et al. (2014) J Geophys Res 119:1707-1727. [13] Fairén AG, et al., 2002, Icarus 160:220-223. [14] Anderson RC et al., 2012, 43rd LPSC. [15] Karasözen E et al., 2016, J Geophys Res. doi: 10.1002/2015JE004936. [16] Dohm JM et al., 2015, 46th LPSC. [17] Dohm JM et al., 2015, AGU Fall Meeting. [18] Komatsu G et al., this LPSC meeting. [19] Dohm JM, et al., 2007b, In Superplumes: Beyond plate tectonics: Springer, 523-537. [20] Dohm, J.M. Maruyama, S., 2014, Geos. Front. 6, 95-101. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gsf.2016.10.005
