 RICHNESS AND EQUITABILITY MEASURES APPLIED TO A K-MEANS CLASSIFICATION OF ALL FOUR MARS ROVERS' APXS OXIDES AND ELEMENTS DATA.  C.M. Rodrigue1 , 1Geography, California State University, Long Beach, CA 90840-1101, rodrigue@csulb.edu.  Introduction:  [1]  describes  the  combination  of APXS data for all 4 Mars rovers into a common target classification system using K-means clustering of standardized weight abundance data for 16 oxides and elements. The goal here is to compare and contrast the 4 rover work areas in terms of their geochemical "personalities" using established measures of "biodiversity" and 1 new measure.  Biogeography and ecology have long attempted to quantify "biodiversity" to analyze ecosystems, identify biodiversity hotspots, and create metrics for conservation and restoration projects.  Biodiversity, while intuitively straightforward, is challenging to operationalize. It can refer to simple counts of species observed in an area,  that  is,  species  richness.   Species  richness  can mislead  by granting equal  weight to  a  large  resident population and to the occurrence of a single vagrant individual outside its normal range. Despite this, species richness is easy to count and does register fluctuations in rare species, so its use persists  [2]. Species  richness  has  been  expanded  to  represent scale-dependent patterns in a nested spatial hierarchy. Species  counts  can be  done for  local  study areas  or small  patches  (alpha diversity)  or  for  coarser-scale landscapes  (gamma diversity)  [3]  though  the  exact scales  for  each level  vary among workers  [4].   This scale-dependent  biodiversity  system  is  coupled  with measures  of  species  contrast  among  pairs  of  local patches  (beta diversity,  counting only species  in  the pair but not shared between them) [5]. Nested  measures  of  species  counts  and  contrasts still embody the same problem of false equalization of species weights, only at multiple scales.  Other metrics have  been  devised  to  penalize  inequity  and  reward evenness  of  species  representation  [2].   Two  of  the most  common are  designed  to  form indices  ranging from 0 for complete dominance by a single species and 1 for  complete evenness among several species: Simpson's Inverse D (DINV): DINV = 1- Σ pi2 (Eq. 1) where: i = a particular species p = proportion of each species Shannon's Equitability measure (EH): EH = [-1(Σ pi(ln(pi)))]/ln(α) (Eq. 2) where: pi = proportion of each species α = target diversity at a given study area As reported in [1], APXS oxide and element standardized relative abundances for MPF, MER, and MSL were classified into 15 clusters using K-means clustering, and the distribution of these clusters among the 4 rover study areas  was compared.   The present paper applies richness and equitability metrics to these data.  Data and Methods:  Counts of APXS targets by cluster are here given in alpha, beta, and gamma diversity formats.  Proportions of each cluster by rover site were then calculated from these to produce the evenness measures. Results:  Cluster richness and contrast.  Gamma diversity is here used as the global diversity of clusters, given by the K=15 request.  In terms of local or  alpha diversities,  Chryse Planitia  sampled  by MPF unsurprisingly has the lowest  alpha diversity at 2. limited by the 11 APXS targets  the  Sojourner  rover  was able  to  take. The other 3 sites are similar to one another, Meridiani Planum having the highest alpha diversity at 13. In terms of beta diversity contrasts, MPF again unsurprisingly shares  the fewest  clusters  with the other sites, since it only had 2 to share. With regard to the more productive rovers, Gusev Crater most resembles Meridiani  Planum,  given  that  MER-A  and  MER-B failed to share only 3 target clusters.  Gale Crater and Gusev Crater are the most divergent, MER-A and MSL failing to share more than half their clusters, fully 7 out of MSL's 11 and MER-A's 12 cluster counts.  Meridiani  serves  as  a  bridge  overlapping Gusev and  Gale, MER-B failing to share only 3 cluster types with MERA and only 4 with MSL. Table 1: Cluster richness and contrast by rover site Cluster equitability.  The Simpson Inverse Diversity measures show similar high levels of cluster equitability  for  the  MSL,  MER-A,  and  MER-B  sites (DINV= 0.83 for the first 2 and 0.77 for MER-B), while MPF shows a lower  DINV  at 0.46, which, even so, is pretty high for a site with 11 readings and 2 clusters. The  Shannon  Equitability  Index  shows  similarly high equitability figures for MSL, MER-A, and MERB (EH = 0.84, 0.81, and 0.71, respectively).  For MPF, however, it provides the absurdly high figure of 0.95: A site with 2 clusters among 11 readings becomes the APXS diversity rock star! Equitability  measures  are  easily  skewed  by  low numbers of species [6]. In this case, the bloated figure for Chryse Planitia is an artifact of the conversion of Shannon Diversity (H', the numerator in Eq. 2) into the equitability measure, EH, by dividing H' by the natural logarithm of alpha diversity.  This denominator excessively prioritizes evenness over richness in situations with low richness.  I experimented with using ln gamma diversity as an alterative denominator in Eq. 2 for a variety of real and artificial  biogeographical  datasets,  and  the new measure, ER, asymptotes at 1.0, like EH, as desired.  It also penalizes equitability in situations of low richness. Applied to the APXS data, the results are far more reasonable:   While  not  as  high  as  DINV or  EH,  ER shows  high  values  for  MLS,  MER-A,  and  MER-B (0.74 for the first two and 0.67 for MER-B).  The MPF site's  relative  evenness  is  appropriately  offset  by  its small alpha diversity. Table 2: Cluster diversity and equitability measures by rover site Figure 1: Clusters by rover site (from [1]) Discussion and Conclusions.  All of the equitability  measures  slightly  deprecate  the  Meridiani  cluster mix in comparison with Gusev and Gale, even though it had a slightly higher alpha diversity than Gusev and a noticeably higher  alpha diversity than Gale.   Even though  MER-B  encountered  more  of  the  different APXS clusters than any of the other rovers, it encountered 7 of them quite rarely, while 2 were over-represented: basaltic soils (Cl. 6) and lightly acid aqueous altered basaltic soils and rocks (Cl. 4). Similarly, all 3 of the equitability measures elevate the diversities of Gusev and Gale.   About a  third of MER-A's targets are picritic basalt (Cl. 8) covering the floor of Gusev.  Even with that level of abundance in 1 cluster, 5 other clusters are quite abundant, so Gusev not only features high  alpha diversity but a relatively balanced array of clusters,  including neutral and acid aqueous altered materials (Cl. 12 & 13) and evolved tephrites (Cl. 10, unique to Gusev, on Husband Hill). Gale, too, receives high scores on all 3 of the equitability indices,  virtually matching the  Gusev  scores, this despite having a noticeably lower alpha diversity. A lot of the balanced profile of Gale Crater has to do with the room afforded by the relative under-representation of basalts (esp. Cl. 6, 8, & 5) in favor of evolved magma materials (Cl. 3 & 2) and materials altered by neutral-alkaline aqueous processes (Cl. 1, 9, & 12). Chryse Planitia,  as  sampled by MPF, had only 2 clusters (the andesitic Cl. 2 and the Mars-typical soils in Cl. 6).   With this tiny  alpha diversity and relative balance between its 2 clusters' relative abundance, this site had the greatest disagreement in equitability-based measures of  diversity.   Simpson's  DINV  did mark it down but not proportionately, and Shannon EH can be blinded by relative evenness as it was, to an absurd degree, here.  Only the new adjustment to Shannon's H' produced an appropriate  mark-down for  MPF.   This measure  may be  of  utility in  continuing analyses  of spectrometry on Mars or in other geoscience applications, such as paleontology and palynology. Acknowledgments: Mars  Exploration  Rover  Oxide  Abundance  Data  and MSL APXS data  were obtained  from the  PDS Geosciences  Node:  https://pdsgeosciences.wustl.edu/.  Mars Pathfinder APXS Oxides Data  came  from USGS PDS  Imaging  Node  Server: https://pdsimage2.wr.usgs.gov/.  I  wish  to  thank  Fred Calef (JPL) for MER-A UTM data. References: [1]  Rodrigue,  C.M.  (2020)  LPS LI, 1262. [2] Morris, E.K. et al. (2014)  Ecol. & Evol., 4, 3514-3524. [3] Whittaker, R.H. (1960) Ecol. Monogr., 30, 279-338. [4] Tuomisto, H. (2010)  Ecography, 33, 2-22. [5] Bynum, N. (2019)  Biodiversity, Biol. LibreTexts,  7,  17392.  [6] Sheldon, A.L.  (1969)  Ecol., 50, 466-467. 
