 K-MEANS CLUSTERING AND MAPPING OF ALL FOUR MARS ROVERS' APXS OXIDE AND ELEMENT RELATIVE ABUNDANCE DATA.  C.M. Rodrigue1 ,  1Geography,  California State University,  Long Beach, CA 90840-1101, rodrigue@csulb.edu.  Introduction:  Thirteen out of 14 successful landers, orbiters, and rovers brought 26 spectrometer systems to Mars.  Attempts have been made to relate spectra taken by different instruments. [1] ran correlations among the  3  spectrometers  on  the  MER rovers  and found virtually none, concluding that this at least implies complementarity and non-redundancy. Others have tried ensemble approaches to rock and soil  classification, exploiting sensor complementarity. [2] integrated 6 cameras and the LIBS and APXS spectrometers on MSL to mimic geologists' field and lab processes for rock identification, resulting in a petrological classification of rocks in Gale Crater. Other ensemble approaches have triangulated orbiter and rover sensors. [3] brought together the hyperspectr al CRISM spectrometer  on  the  Mars  Reconnaissance  Orbiter (MRO)  with  the  Mini-TES,  Mössbauer,  and  APXS spectrometers on the MER-B rover to bear on the deposition and alteration histories of sulfate minerals in Meridiani Planum.  [4] integrated 4 spectrometers on 3 orbiters and the HiRISE camera on MRO with spectrometers on 3 rovers working near the crustal dichotomy to work out 2 different magmatic series in Noachian rocks:  the alkaline and the sub-alcaline suites.  The  present  paper  combines  spectra  from the  1 spectrometer found on all 4 rovers, APXS. The goal is to classify all its targets for comparison of all 4 regions in a single inductively developed framework. Data  and Methods:  Eight  steps  were involved. First, all 901 Alpha Proton/Particle X-ray Spectrometer (APXS) readings from all 4 rovers through November 2016 were downloaded from the Planetary Data System (PDS) Geosciences Node and USGS in a variety of formats  and  layouts.   Second,  these  were  integrated into  a  common  database,  in  an  OpenOffice  Calc spreadsheet.   These readings contain uncertainties reflecting the evolution of the instrument, surface treatment of targets, and vagaries of instrument placement but were accepted as is. Third, all readings for each oxide and element were standardized against their means and standard deviations for all 901 records.  Fourth, the resulting t-scores  were  then imported  into PAleontological STatistics (PAST 3) software for K-means clustering (K=15). Fifth was calculation of descriptive statistics for oxides and elements by cluster and geodiversity statistics for the 4 sites. The sixth step was geocoding: Latitudes and longitudes for each rover's original data files had been reckoned differently and required pre-processing for  consistent  placement  on  the  same datum (MOLA, r=3396 km).  The seventh step entailed saving a part of the database as a CSV file of clusters, names,  missions,  latitudes and  longitudes,  and  select attributes,  which  was  then  imported  for  mapping  in Google  Earth  Mars.   Comparison  of  the  means  and ranges of each cluster in Calc graphs led to the eighth step: grouping the 15 clusters into 5 metaclusters and testing contrasts among rover sites with Chi-squared. Results:  Results consist of visualizations, including a  downloadable  KMZ map (http://web.csulb.edu/ ~rodrigue/mars/apxs/GE/APXS15tscores.kmz),  graphs of  standardized  oxide  and  element  scores  by cluster and metacluster, graph of clusters present at each rover site, tables of the  alpha  and  beta  and equitability diversities of site clusters, as well as detailed descriptions of each cluster and sample targets. Figure  1:  Example  of  Google  Earth  Mars  map  of APXS clusters, MER-B, Victoria Crater, Meridiani Figure 2: Mean t-scores of oxides & elements by metacluster. Figure 3: Clusters by rover site Metacluster and Cluster Descriptions.  Metacluster X (many eXogenous)  Cluster 7 (16 meteorites or hydrothermally altered with extremely high Ni, elevated Mg and Zn) Metacluster B (Basaltic rocks and soils)  Cluster 6  (187 basaltic rocks and soils, the least divergent material on Mars)  Cluster 8 (102 pictritic basaltic rocks, some soils)  Cluster 15 (72 soils, from local basalts and global dust)  Cluster 5 (32 olivine, some with precipitation of Fe sulfates and carbonates) Metacluster E (possibly from Evolved magmas)  Cluster 3 (35 alkaline igneous rocks akin to mugearite)  Cluster 2 (79, elevated silica, andesitic, can be more altered by neutral water than fractionated)  Cluster 10  (28, confined to Husband Hill, Wishstone & Champagne class rocks, tephritic) Metacluster N (Neutral to alkaline aqueous alteration)  Cluster  1  (112  Mars-typical  material  showing  slight modification by non-acidic waters: Cl & Br)  Cluster  12  (42  also Mars-typical  basaltic  material  enriched in Cl and somewhat elevated in Br)  Cluster 9 (13 targets from just 2 rocks in Meridiani & Gale Crater, clastics highly elevated in Zn & Br)  Cluster  11  (5  targets  from the  Stephen  rock  in  Gale drastically elevated in Zn, Mn, Mg, & Br, Cl) Metacluster S (Sulfur, acidic aqueous alteration)  Cluster  4  (132  Mars-typical  rock,  mudstone,  or  soil somewhat elevated in sulfur trioxide)  Cluster 13 (28 pervasively acidic water altered materials with significant elevation in sulfur trioxide)  Cluster 14 (18 highly elevated in SO 3 and CaO and interpreted as calcium carbonate) Discussion  and Conclusions.   The  15  clusters  and  5 metaclusters seem to fall into 3 starting points:  basaltic, possibly evolved magmatic materials, and meteorites or materials resembling them.  The basaltic starting point in some cases  then  diverged  into  2  aqueous  alteration  pathways,  one neutral-alkaline  and  the  other  acidic,  themselves linked  to changes in the martian atmosphere described in [5]'s  Phyllocian and Theiikian. Figure 4: Starting points and alteration trajectories of clusters The allocation of the 15 clusters contrasts visibly and often sharply among the 4 rover  study  areas.  Testing the 3 rover sites with enough statistical power (MER-A, MER-B, and MSL) for the significance of the differences among them in  metacluster  allocation,  X2 was  304.022  at  8  df,  with p<0.001 and an effect size of 0.413: highly significant and moderately strong differences among the study areas.  Gusev Crater is basalt dominated and acidic aqueous impoverished, Meridiani  Planum is  dominated  by acidic  aqueous  signals and short on evolved magma-derived and neutral aqueous altered materials, and Gale Crater is enhanced in evolved magma-derived and neutral-aqueous altered materials and deficient in basaltic materials. Acknowledgments: MER  and  MSL  APXS  data were  obtained  from  the  PDS  Geosciences  Node: https://pds-geosciences.wustl.edu/.   Mars  Pathfinder APXS Oxides  Data  came from USGS PDS Imaging Node  Server:  https://pdsimage2.wr.usgs.gov/.  PAST available  at  http://folk.uio.no/ohammer/past/;  Google Earth at http://www.google.com/earth/; my X2 calculator  at  http://web.csulb.edu/~rodrigue/ChiSquare.ods.  I wish to thank Fred Calef (JPL) for MER-A UTM data. References: [1] Anderson, R.B. and Bell, J.F., III (2013)  Icarus, 223,  157-180.  [2]  Mangold,  N.  et  al. (2017)  Icarus, 284,  1-17.  [3]  Arvidson,  R.E.  et  al. (2015)  JGR: Planets, 120, 429-451. [4] Sautter, V. et al. (2016) Lithos, 254/255, 36-52.  [5] Bibring, J.-P. et al. (2006) Science, 312, 400-404. 
