
2099.PDF
CHEMCAM CHEMOSTRATRIGRAPHY OF THE PAHRUMP OUTCROP, GALE CRATER.  O. Forni1, N. 
Mangold2, D. L. Blaney3, M. Fisk4, R.C. Wiens5, P.-Y. Meslin1, M. Nachon2, O. Gasnault1, S. Maurice1, A. Cousin1, 
S. Le Mou lic2. 1Institut de Recherches en Astrophysique et Plan tologie, Toulouse, France, 2LPGN, Nantes, 
France, 3JPL, Pasadena, USA, 4Oregon State University, Corvallis, USA,   5LANL, Los Alamos, USA ; [oli-
vier.forni@irap.omp.eu] 
 
Introduction:  ChemCam is an active remote sens-
ing instrument suite that has operated successfully on 
MSL since landing 28 months ago [1,2]. It uses laser 
pulses to remove dust and to profile through weather-
ing coatings of rocks up to 7 m away. Laser-induced 
breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) obtains emission 
spectra of materials ablated from the samples in elec-
tronically excited states. The intensities of these lines 
are proportional to the amount of the related element.  
ChemCam is sensitive to most chemical major ele-
ments as well as to a set of minor and trace elements 
such as Li, Sr, Ba, and  Rb. Qualitative and quantita-
tive relationships between elements can be identified 
using univariate and multivariate techniques [3, 4].  
We report here a summary of the chemical variations 
occurring at the Pahrump waypoint and try to outline 
some properties of the various facies that belong to it 
based on the 400 observation points probed by Chem-
Cam from Sol 758 to Sol 801. 
Pahrump waypoint description: Based on orbital 
mapping Pahrump is the first stratigraphic unit of Mt. 
Sharp that Curiosity has explored. It has distinct albedo 
and textural appearance in HiRISE color imaging. 
Pahrump layers are characterized by three main differ-
ent facies: the first one consists of decimeter-high 
resistant layers, the second one is characterized by 
recessive laminated layered terrains and the third one 
has platy and often fractured slabs [5]. Several out-
crops have been analyzed:   Confidence Hills  where a 
hole was drilled in platy fractured layers,   Pink 
Cliffs , and  Book Cliffs  which display resistant 
layers of various thickness separated by recessive 
layers,  San Gabriel  mainly composed of finely lami-
nated layers,  Carnivore Canyon  and Alexander 
Hill , which correspond to massive resistant layers 
with poorly visible lamination, the laminated layers of 
 Chinle  and the  Whale Rock  sediments which have 
a distinct layering with very visible lamination that is 
more resistant than the underlying Pahrump layers. 
From the chemical point of view the sediments with 
the closest composition to the Pahrump waypoint are 
the conglomerates, especially at the Darwin waypoint 
[6]. With respect to these conglomerates, Pahrump is 
only slightly enriched in Mg whereas sandstones found 
at Yellowknife Bay and elsewhere have higher Mg. 
This similarity with conglomerates suggests a similar 
provenance with small variations related to physical 
sorting or alteration. 
Pahrump elemental compositional variations as 
seen by ChemCam: In the following we study the 
variations in composition between the different out-
crops of the Pahrump waypoint. There is generally a 
common increase in aluminum and titanium for several 
layers (San Gabriel ,  Carnivore Canyon_Alexander 
Hill  and  Chinle ) whereas as the  Confidence Hill  
unit is characterized by low Al (Fig 1.).  Pink Cliffs  
and  Book Cliffs  are intermediate and  Whale Rock  
is very different from the others units having generally 
low Al but not following the general observed trend. A 
comparable trend can be observed with the alkalis, that 
generally increase from  Confidence Hills  to 
 Chinle ,  Whale Rock  being very low. 
Figure 1: Al ICA score vs. Ti ICA score for the Pahrump 
waypoint showing the correlation between these elements. 
Pahrump is also characterized by an overall high 
lithium content of about 40 ppm which is much higher 
than the average Mars Li content of about 5 to 10 ppm. 
[7]. Li exhibits also a strong correlation with Al;  the 
 Book Cliffs  and  Carnivore Canyon-Alexander 
Hills  units are the most enriched in Li with a mean 
value of about 45 ppm (Fig 2.).  
From a chemical point of view, two groups of lay-
ers appear very different among the units of the out-
crop, namely the  Carvivore Canyon_Alexander Hill  
unit and the  Whale Rock  unit. 
     The  Alexander Hill-Carnivore Canyon section: 
This unit is characterized by fine laminated indurated 
2099.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
and massive decimeter-high strata. Chemically it is 
enriched in Al, Mg and H and depleted in Fe with 
respect to the other surrounding units, the alkalis re-
maining the same. It is also enriched in Li and Cr, the 
latter not being correlated with Fe. This unit has also 
the highest Chemical Index of Alteration (CIA) of 
about 60 (Fig 3.). The higher Mg and Al are also corre-
lated with  higher H, perhaps indicative of Mg-clays.   
 
Figure 2: Li content vs. Al2O3 content for the Pahrump way-
point showing the correlation between these elements. The 
mean Li content is about 40 ppm.  
    The  Whale Rock section: This unit is very hetero-
geneous. One of the target Vaqueros is dominated by 
high Ca content and low major-element totals, suggest-
ing sulphates, although the identification of sulphur 
lines is unclear. The other target, Orrocopia, contains 
very high Ti, a property suggesting enhanced ilmenite. 
Diagenetic features: Pahrump is characterized by 
the presence of many diagenetic features, among 
which white veins filling fractures, interpreted as cal-
cium sulfate veins and dentritic concretions containing 
high Mg, Ni, and S [8]. Whereas veins are clearly late 
stage, the role of Mg-rich concretions in early stages of 
diagenesis may have modified the composition of the 
host rock since they seem nucleated both within the 
host mudstone and at the edges of fractures. Some 
evidences uggest that these diagenetic crystal clusters 
and dendrites are post-depositional, potentially burial 
diagenetic features [9]. 
Discussion and Summary: From all the units 
composing the Pahrump waypoint, two units appear 
very different from the other units. Indeed the  Confi-
dence Hills  unit and drill hole is not completely typi-
cal of Pahrump average composition. In particular, it 
looks depleted in Mg, Ti, Al and alkalis and exhibits a 
large variability in Fe. Secondly, the capping   Whale 
Rock  unit has somewhat uncommon chemistry, with 
high Ca and sulfate concentrations as well as elevated 
content of titano-ferros oxides. Although the different 
sections appear as different facies [5] some commonal-
ities can be identified between them. 
 
 
Figure 3: Chemical Index of Alteration (CIA) for the 
Pahrump waypoint.  Alexander Hills  has the largest value. 
The two members that have value lower than 50 are  Confi-
dence Hills  and  Whale Rock .  
 Pink Cliffs ,  Chinle ,  and  San Gabriel  have 
relatively homogeneous compositions, although  Pink 
Cliffs  is enriched in Li. 
 Alexander Hills  has very faint laminations. It is 
enriched in Al, Mg, H, Cr and Li and depleted in Fe. It 
may contains more clays and forms at deeper levels. 
 Pink Cliffs  and part of  Confidence Hills : These 
sections are characterized by the presence of diagenetic 
features like the Ca-sulphate veins and the Mg-rich 
dendritic concretions. 
Finally the difference between some of these layers 
could be partly due to various provenances, especially 
for the  Whale Rock  section, and partly due to altera-
tion, especially the layers with enhanced Mg and re-
sistant facies, considering their context of lacustrine 
deposits [10].   
References: [1] Maurice S. et al. (2012) SSR, 170,95-
166 [2] Wiens R.C. et al. (2012)  SSR, 170, 167- [3] Forni O. 
et al. (2013) SCAB, 61, [4] Wiens R.C. et al. (2013) SCAB, 
82, 1-27 [5] Stack, K. M. (2015) this meeting [6] Mangold N. 
(2014) AGU Fall meeting. [7] Olllila et al. (2014), 119, 1-31 
[8] Nachon et al. (2015) this meeting. [9] Kah L. C. (2015) 
this meeting [10] Grotzinger J. et al. [2014] AGU Fall meet-
ing. 
2099.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
