
2791.PDF
ASSESSING GALE CRATER AS A POTENTIAL HUMAN MISSION LANDING SITE ON MARS 
F. J. Calef III1 B. Clark2, W. Goetz3, J. Lasue4, 5J. Martin-Torres, and 6M. Zorzano Mier, 1Jet Propulsion Laboratory-
Caltech, fcalef@jpl.nasa.gov, 2Space Science Institute, bclark@spacescience.org, 3Max Planck Institute for Solar 
System Research, Goetz@mps.mpg.de, 4L Irap Soutient Sciences En Marche, jlasue@irap.omp.eu, 5Instituto Anda-
luz de Ciencias de la Tierra (CSIC-UGR), javiermt@iact.ugr-csic.es, 6Centro de Astrobiolog a (INTA-CSIC), zorza-
nomm@cab.inta-csic.es.
Introduction: Mars is the  horizon goal  for hu-
man space flight [1]. Towards that endeavor, one must 
consider several factors in regards to choosing a land-
ing site suitable for a human-rated mission including: 
entry, descent, and landing (EDL) characteristics, sci-
entific diversity, and possible insitu resources [2]. Se-
lecting any one place is a careful balance of reducing 
risks and increasing scientific return for the mission. 
 Go where you know : There are tens of pro-
posed landing sites for robotic missions with varying 
scientific interest, as well as the handful of locations 
currently visited by successfully landed spacecraft. For 
the former, sites such as Eberswalde delta, Holden 
crater, and Mawrth Vallis has received extensive or-
bital coverage and analysis during the MSL landing 
site selection workshop and are well characterized. In 
addition,  runner up  candidates for that mission are 
now on the list for evaluation for the Mars2020 rover, 
e.g. Jezero Crater or Nili Fossae, and contain equal 
(though not fully processed) orbital data for reference 
[3]. For legacy and current missions to Mars, three are 
landers, and one lander/ rover, with limited visible 
areal extent: Viking 1 Viking 2, Phoenix, and Path-
finder/Sojourner. The remaining rover missions, MER 
Spirit, MER Opportunity, and MSL Curiosity offer the 
most ground truth over several to tens of kilometers 
both in and outside their nominal landing ellipses. 
While the HiRISE instrument provides unprecedented 
detail of Mars  surface to current and future missions, 
the insitu observations of rock density, soil mechanics, 
temperature fluctuations, dust opacity, radiation (via 
Curiosity), traversability, not to mention insitu science, 
are not directly measureable or resolvable by orbital 
assets. While we can certainly make well-educated and 
higher-order assessments of landing sites, revisiting 
anywhere we ve gone before can only reduce risk by 
removing uncertainty or shrinking errors bars in land-
ing site analysis. Insitu data decreases risk compared to 
other potential landing sites that have never been visit-
ed because of this ability to remove the unknown at the 
surface; albeit we ve been very successful over the 
past two decades with landed missions. However, a 
human-rated mission will likely require reducing risk 
by an order of magnitude, thereby requiring an order of 
magnitude better data than we currently have; only 
insitu data provides this level of certainty. From a fi-
nancial perspective, insitu data is  priceless  for a hu-
man-rated mission, not replicable for other sites. 
EDL: Like all missions, Mars  elevation limits 
landing sites to those with a fairly deep atmospheric 
well to assist in aerobraking and parachute deceleration 
in preparation for landing. Previous missions have tar-
geted areas below the 0 km Martian elevation line [3]. 
Thermal requirements have kept landing sites with ~30 
degrees of the equator, except for the short-lived Phoe-
nix mission (by design). Most proposed landing sites 
meet these criteria, as well as basic rock abundance, 
relief, dust, and thermal inertia requirements all likely 
suitable for a human mission as well. 
Insitu resources: While there are many technolo-
gies yet to be devised for resource extraction, we can 
look at the one resource that provides breathable air, 
sustenance, and fuel: water. Besides the poles, water-
ice deposits have been found near the surface down to 
latitudes as low as ~43 degrees [4]. If a mission wanted 
to drill to potential subsurface ice-water reservoirs, 
being closer to the poles would be advantageous. 
However, many landing sites have water bound in 
there constituent rocks (e.g. clays) to serve as a  min-
ing  resource. Results from the CHEMCAM instru-
ment aboard Curiosity have also reported higher water 
abundance in soils [5]. Dune sands/ripples/soils, where 
available, may provide an additional resource for water 
extraction technologies. 
Why Gale crater:  The following is a breakdown 
of reasons Gale crater makes an excellent landing site 
for the first human mission to Mars. 
EDL: Gale crater is one of the lowest elevation 
landing sites at ~4.5 km MOLA elevation, well below 
Meridiani Planum (~-1.4 km) and Gusev Crater (-1.9 
km) [3]. This increased atmospheric density will de-
crease requirements for landing from increased veloci-
ty reduction with parachutes or other methods like 
low-density supersonic deceleration. Dynamic entry 
data and a well-understood atmospheric profile, includ-
ing additional seasonal data (temperature, pressure, 
wind speed) from the Rover Environmental Monitor-
ing Station [REMS] package onboard Curiosity for at 
least a Martian year, adds to reducing uncertainty dur-
ing any landing. These atmospheric measurements, as 
a whole, are unique to this locale. 
Radiation: The thick  air  also provides more radi-
ation protection than other sites. Back-of-the-envelope 
extrapolations from [6] indicate ~25-32 gm/cm2 shield-
ing at 90-degree elevation (i.e. directly overhead); 6-8 
gm/cm2 more shielding than Gusev or Meridiani. 
2791.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
While the additional atmospheric shielding yields only 
an incremental improvement in protection from Galac-
tic Cosmic Radiation (GCR) and solar proton events 
compared to other landing sites, more is better for any 
long-term mission. There is likely some additional 
shielding to be gain from the crater walls, though this 
doesn t mitigate the majority of overhead radiation. 
More importantly, the RAD instrument onboard Curi-
osity initial results from ~300 sols [7] indicates 0.64 +- 
0.12 millisieverts/day or ~1.01 Sv for a Mars mission 
at this location. Hardware can now be tuned with insitu 
measurements to meet the radiation hazard at this loca-
tion. 
Terrain: In terms of terrain hazards, ~10 km of en-
gineering camera  (NAVCAM and HAZCAM) and 
mobility data provide an unprecedented level of terrain 
information, excluding the Opportunity rover (>40 
km). While Meridiani is likely the smoothest and safest 
of any landing site [3], Gale is rated as safe as other 
landing sites with terrain hazards sampled and well 
understood throughout its traverse to Aeolis Mons. 
Scientific Diversity: Going with  what we know , 
the Peace Vallis delta deposits [8], confirmed habitable 
environments [9], evidence of a lake [9], insitu me-
thane observations [10], and existence of indigenous 
Martian carbon both ancient and active [11], not to 
mention the yet fully explored 5 km sedimentary stack 
of Mt. Sharp (Aeolis Mons) is a scientific cornucopia 
for an human mission to expand upon and explore. 
Gale crater is also one of, if not the, only site with ac-
cess to both northern plains and southern highland ma-
terial within a relatively short distance (~20 km). 
While other sites offer the possibilities of meandering 
rivers (Eberswalde), extensive clay deposits (Mawrth 
Vallis), sabkha/lake/sea deposits (Meridiani), and car-
bonates (Gusev), we know right now that Gale has 
many of these elements, if not more variety, than other 
sites can definitively offer. 
Insitu Water Resources: There is little chance of 
near-surface water-ice for resource utilization, but wa-
ter bound in minerals and loose grains could serve as a 
water source. Some  easy  water may come extracting 
adsorbed atmospheric water in ripple and dune sedi-
ments [5] and estimated 3-6 weight% in amorphous 
sediments at Rocknest [12]. Gale crater s depth might 
assist in locating a deep aquifer source through drill-
ing. Groundwater inventories could be within a few 
hundred meters depth from the inner depths of Gale, 
assuming an initial global water layer between 10-
100m [13]. Lack of readily available water in any form 
is a problem for the vast majority of proposed landing 
sites near the equator; however Gale crater provides a 
clear advantage of depth for accessing groundwater 
aquifers and a known quantity of adsorbed and  miner-
alized  water that can be planned for based on insitu 
measurements. 
Reference Mission: Reference design missions 
have been generated for the human exploration for 
Mars, a recent one being Mars design reference archi-
tecture (DRA) 5.0 [2]. Though Gale crater can easily 
meet all the science and engineering goals I-V in DRA 
5.0, two mission types were proposed:  short-stay  
with 30-90 days on the surface (500-650 days total) 
and  long-stay  with 500+ days on Mars (~900 days 
total).  Short-stay  missions were ruled out partially 
because of insufficient time for assessing and collect-
ing diverse samples. Gale crater offers crustal material 
within ~20 km at the rim, Aeolis Mons (Mt. Sharp) 
clay to sulfate transition within ~15 km, primary allu-
vial fan material <5 km and fluvially derived conglom-
erates and clays, some lacustrine, upon landing in 
many areas of the current MSL ellipse. The 
Isidis/Syrtis reference landing site in DRA 5.0 had 
most scientific features well beyond the safe  walk-
back  distance of ~20 km from a centrally located 
habitat. Many known scientific outcrops at Gale crater 
are well within this distance if the human habitat where 
placed within the current MSL landing ellipse. For a 
human first mission to Mars, distance to outcrops 
would be close, safe, and pre-characterized sufficiently 
by Curiosity to allow short or long-stay missions. 
Conclusion: Gale crater is a scientifically fascinat-
ing site on Mars with abundant existing orbital and 
ground data for assessing a future human mission to 
Mars. The deep atmosphere provides substantial EDL 
margin unique to this location. A well-characterized 
radiation environment provides hallmarks for design-
ing habitats and assessing daily exposure limits for 
extravehicular activities. The MSL science team has 
already shown Gale crater to harbor ancient habitable 
environments and abundant liquid water in the past. A 
human mission to this location could be done safely 
and with assurance to what we d find on arrival and 
the strong potential for future discoveries. 
References: [1] Pathways to Exploration, ISBN: 
978-0-309-30507-5, 2014. [2] Human Exploration of 
Mars DRA v5.0, NASA-SP-2009-566, 2009. [3] 
Golombek et al., Space Sci Rev, 2012. [4] Byrne et al., 
Science, 2009. [5] Meslin et al., Science, 2013. [6] 
Simonsen & Nealy, NASA Tech. Paper 3300, 1993. [7] 
Hassler et al., Science, 2014. [8] Palucis et al., JGR, 
2013. [9] Grotzinger et al., Science, 2013. [10] Web-
ster et al., Science, 2014. [11] NASA/JPL press re-
lease,http://mars.nasa.gov/msl/news/whatsnew/index.c
fm?FuseAction=ShowNews&NewsID=1767, 2014. 
[12] Leshin et al., Science, 2013. [13] Clifford, JGR. 
1993. 
2791.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
