 THE CHEMICAL AND MINERALOGICAL STRATIGRAPHY OF LOWER MT. SHARP: RELATING ROVER OBSERVATIONS TO ORBITAL PREDICTIONS.  R.E. Milliken1, J.A. Hurowitz2, D.L. Bish3, J.P. Grotzinger4, R. Wiens, 1Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, ralph_milliken@brown.edu , 2SUNY Stonybrook, NY, 3Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 4Caltech, Pasadena, CA, 5Los Alamos Natl. Lab, Los Alamos, NM.  Introduction:  The Curiosity rover has provided a wealth of data to understand how small-scale observations, and paleo-environmental conditions in particular, relate to geologic interpretations based on orbitally acquired data.  Mt. Sharp and Gale crater were chosen as a landing site in part due to the intriguing mineralogical stratigraphy observed in CRISM reflectance spectra acquried from orbit that show clay, hematite, and sulfate-bearing strata overlain by rocks that apparently lack these minerals [1]. The lowermost portions of Mt. Sharp were predicted to contain hematite, hydrated silica, and other hydrated phases [1-3], but the specific conditions under which these phases were formed/deposited was unclear based solely on orbital observations.  In situ observations by Curiosity have revelaed that strata within Gale crater and lower Mt. Sharp record alluvial, fluvial, and lacustrine environments and their associated processes [4-5]. Sedimentary facies vary laterally and vertically over the scale of the rover traverse (~12 km) and are consistent with deltaic sandstones in the Kimberley region and laminated mudstones in the Pahrump Hills [5]. But how do these variations relate to ~18m/pixel CRISM spectra and other orbital data? Here we integrate analyses from the rover payload to assess the chemical and mineralogical stratigraphy of lower Mt. Sharp in order to 1) evaluate depositional and formation conditions of these strata and 2) assess how/if these observataions can be linked to orbital data to understand the broader geologic history of Mt. Sharp and Gale crater beyond Curiosity's path.  Methods:  This study utilizes ChemCam (CCAM), APXS, MAHLI, CheMin, and Mastcam (MCAM) data from sols 750-1196, which span the arrival at Pahrump Hills through the recent arrival at the Bagnold dunes. We focus on bulk bedrock properties and thus targets corresponding to unconsolidated materials and obvious diagenetic features (e.g., veins, concretions) are not considered in this work. CheMin data were processed using the methods described in [6] and modeled using Rietveld refinement and FULLPAT. CRISM observations over lower Mt. Sharp were analyzed using the same methods of [1] and detailed geologic mapping was carried out in ArcGIS using HiRISE imagery. CRISM pixels corresponding to each map unit were also averaged to understand bulk spectral properties associated with distinct geologic/geomorphic units.  Results:  Curiosity has examined two major stratigraphic units, separated by an unconformity, since sol 750 and each exhibits distinct properties based on orbital imagery (e.g., color/tonality in HiRISE imagery), CRISM spectra, and rover observations. The lower stratigraphic unit has been named the Murray fm. [5] and the younger, unconformably overlying unit the Stimson fm. [7]. Strata of the Murray fm. are more recessive, finer-grained, and lighter-toned than those in the Stimson, which are more resistant to erosion, coarser-grained, and darker-toned. The Murray fm. was examined in detail in the Pahrump Hills (Figure 1) where it was composed dominantly of finely-laminated mudstones with occasional lenses of sandstones, interpreted to have been deposited in a lacustrine environment [5]. In contrast, the Stimson fm. is dominated by crossbedded sandstones deposited above a sharp contact with at least several meters of erosional relief. This contact was studied in detail at Marias Pass [7] and was also encounted at Bridger Basin (Fig. 1). This contact occurs over a wide range in elevation (Fig. 2) and in some locations the basal Stimson is characterized by very coarse (gravel) sandstones with light-toned clasts immediately above the contact [7]. CRISM spectral averages indicate the presence of hematite and hydrated phases in the lightest-toned portions of the Murray fm. and similar but weaker absorptions in slightly darker-toned portions. The hydration absorptions are weak and preclude definitive mineral identifications, but they indicate H2O and likely OHbearing components, which may include silica, jarosite, gypsum, and/or clay minerals. These spectral features are notably absent in the Stimson fm., which is spectrally similar to surrounding dusty and 'basaltic' terrains,  Figure 1. Rover traverse in lower Mt. Sharp showing range in wt.% SiO2 for CCAM targets. Si increase occurs in both Murray and Stimson targets after Pahrump Hills.  with the exception that some portions of the Stimson exhibit stronger pyroxene absorptions compared with typical martian dust. CheMin data reveal that the mineralogy of the Murray fm. is remarkably diverse as a function of stratigraphic elevation and includes feldspar, pyroxene, Feoxides (hematite and magnetite), clay minerals, sulfates (jarosite, Ca-sulfates), and silica phases [8]. In contrast, with the exception of Si-enriched targets, the bulk chemistry of targets within the Murray and Stimson fms. are rather homogeneous. Rocks within the Murray are enriched  in Si, Mg, K and have higher chemical index of alteration (CIA) values relative to those in the Stimson, possibly indicating enhanced chemical weathering in the sediment source region for these muds [9]. Most notably, significant increases in Si are obsserved in a number of Murray and Stimson fm. targets, particularly where these lithologies were examined in detail at contacts after leaving Pahrump Hills (Fig. 1-2) [10-11]. Corresponding CheMin data reveal that Si enrichment is associated with a variety of Si phases, including cristobalite, tridymite, and opal-A [12].  Discussion:  Textural, chemical, and mineralogical data suggest both the Murray and Stimson fms. contain  rocks that have experienced a wide range in degree of diagenesis. Rocks in the Stimson fm. that experienced minimal diagenesis are primarily basaltic sandstones, consistent with CRISM spectral signatures. Stimson rocks considered to be diagenetically modified are enriched in Si and are associated with light-toned zones that run parallel to fractures [11] (high elevation blue points in Fig. 2). CheMin data for one of these locations indicates significant opal-A, which is also in agreement with high-Si APXS and CCAM results. Indeed, HiRISE images show that the Stimson and similar map units contain large fracture systems. This suggests migration of Si-rich fluids through pervasive fracture systems and ultimately precipitation of opaline silica adjacent to the fractures, forming 'halos' akin to some types of leisegang banding in terrestrial settings. Though clearly visible in MCAM and HiRISE images, these fractures are volumentrically small in terms of CRISM pixel size and may explain why such occurrences of hydrated silica is not readily observable from orbit. At Marias Pass, Si-enrichment occurs in some points for select Stimson targets, most notably the coarsegrained targets near the Murray-Stimson contact. This is consistent with the presence of eroded Si-rich fragments from Murray fm. being incorporated into the overlying Stimson. This would in turn support the sedimentological evidence that the contact is an erosional unconformity, and the observation that this contact occurs over a wide range in elevation (Fig. 2).  Si-rich Murray targets occur in two forms: lighttoned zones (observed in Bridger Basin) and finely laminated mudstones (observed at Marias Pass). The former may be diagenetically overprinted by Si-rich fluids, possibly associated with the event(s) that formed the Sirich halos in the overlying Stimson. The latter are finely laminated mudstones (type examples are Elk and Lamoose targets) and may instead represent primary Si precipitation due to changes in lake chemistry during emplacement of the Murray fm. [13]. Curiosity data confirm orbital predictions of hematite [1-2] and silica-rich phases  [3] in the Murray fm. and demonstrate that these phases may record a variety of processes. Importantly, although total Fe does not vary significantly within lower Mt. Sharp (aside from a decrease in Si-enriched targets), the mineralogical host of Fe is quite variable, as is the oxidation state (e.g., magnetite versus hematite). The presence of hydration absoprtions in CRISM data for the Murray fm. as a whole suggests clays, jarosite, or other hydroxylated phases may be more common or widespread in these strata than recognized thus far along the rover traverse, a prediction that can be tested with future CheMin analyses as Curiosity proceeds up Mt. Sharp. If true, these orbitally-detectable signatures may be important markers of variation in lake chemistry, oxidation state, and/or diagenetic processes.  References:[1] Milliken, R.E. et al. (2010) GRL, 37, L04201;[2] Fraeman, A. et al. (2013) Geology, 11031106;[3] Seelos, K. et al. (2014) GRL, 4880-4887;[4] Grotzinger et al. (2014) Science, 10.1126/science. 1242777;[5] Grotzinger et al. (2015) Science, 10.1126/science.aac7575;[6] Bish et al. (2013) Science, 10.1126/science.1238932;[7] Newsom et al. (2016) this conference;[8] Rampe, E. et al. (2016) this conference;[9] McLennan et al. (2015) 46th LPSC, #2553;[10] Frydenvang et al. (2016) this conference;[11] Gasda et al. (2016) this conference;[12] Morris, R. et al. (2016) this conference;[13] Hurowitz, J. et al. (2016), this conf.  Figure 2. Chemostratigraphy of select oxides for lower Mt. Sharp. SS = sandstone, MS = mudstone 