 Figure 1. (A) context for sol 1182 in situ measurements near High dune. Note lighter-toned, less red ripple crests. (B) MAHLI image of Warsaw ripple crest and (C) Weissrand disturbed sands. (D-F) MAHLI images of 100-300 um clasts with diverse colors. Gray-blue opaque, white opaque, red opaque, and yellow translucent grains are within the images, indicated by the colored arrows. Grains are rounded to subrounded. Gray grains are more prevalent in the coarse soits, comprising ~60%, but are found at <~30% in the track.  CHEMISTRY AND MINERALOGY IN SITU AT THE BAGNOLD SAND DUNES: EVIDENCE FOR AEOLIAN SORTING AND SIZE-DEPENDENCE IN SAND COMPOSITION.  B.L. Ehlmann1,2, N. Bridges3, A.A. Fraeman1, M.G.A. Lapotre1, K. Edgett4, J.R. Johnson3, A. Cousin5, A. Yen2, P. Conrad6, L. Thompson7, J. Van Beek4, D. Vaniman8, S. Schröder5,9, A. Vasavada2, and the MSL Science Team. 1Division of Geological & Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology 2Jet Propulation Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 3Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, 4Malin Space Science Systems 5Institut de Recherche en Astrophysique et Planétologie, Toulouse, France 6NASA Goddard Spaceflight Center 7University of New Brunswick, 8Planetary Science Institute, 9DLR, Institute of Optical Sensor Systems, Berlin, Germany  (ehlmann@caltech.edu)   Introduction:  The MSL Curiosity rover is presently conducting (since sol ~1170) its in situ investigations of the Bagnold Dune Field, the first active dune field  on another planet to be visited by a rover. The campaign seeks to answer a number of fundamental questions about the physics and geomorphology of aeolian transport and the nature of compositional heterogeneity of Martian soils [see 1 for campaign overview]. Here we report integrated results from compositional analyses at the Bagnold dune field. Specifically, we will address (1) How do sand mineralogy and volatile content vary with grain size?; (2) To what extent are winds chemically and mineralogically sorting the sands? The answers have implications for our basic understanding of Martian soils, the nature of protolith compositions and source regions, and the interpretation of the Martian sedimentary rock record. The Bagnold Dunes are of particular interest because there is evidence from orbital and Curiosity remote sensing data of their distinctive spectral properties vs. other fine soils in Gale crater. Indeed, modeling of modal mineralogy with CRISM data coupled with HiRISE-based determinations of repatation flux suggests that active Bagnold dunes are are less dusty and enriched in coarse-grained phases such as olivine [2], relative to their less active counterparts. This compositionally variable dune field may be a modern analog for interpreting paleodune fields reported preserved in the lower stratigraphy of Gale crater's Mt. Sharp [3].  Methods. As of 8 January 2016, Curiosity has conducted compositional remote sensing via ChemCam passive and Mastcam multispectral visible/near-infrared reflectance data for mineralogy [4] and ChemCam active LIBS measurements for chemistry [5]. On sols 1182 and 1184 Curiosity made its first in situ measurements of Bagnold sand composition and grain-scale color properties with APXS [6] and MAHLI [7] at an interdune sandsheet and within High dune, respectively.  Preliminary Results: Sand Grain Properties.  MAHLI measurements of the four in situ targets [7] show there is wind sorting by grain size near and within the High dune. Most ripples (undisturbed) are armored by medium to coarse sand grains (Table 1). However, the undisturbed, non-ripple (trough) surface contains very fine to fine sand (and smaller) with scattered medium grains. In the surface disturbed by a rover wheel, most grains are fine sand and smaller.   Figure 2. APXS chemistry of Bagnold sands and other materials, ratioed to the chemistry of the Portage target at Rocknest. Error bars are for individual measurements for Bagnold sands (black) and other Gale crater fine materials (light yellow) and are standard deviation for Gusev (blue) and Meridiani (red) data. Table 1. Grain size ranges observed in MAHLI images acquired of targets on High Dune. Ripples are characteristically coarser grained. Target (sol#_name) Type Bulk Grain Size Range, µm (typical) Armor Grain Size Range, µm (typical) 1182_Warsaw undist., ripple <100 100-1000  (200-400) 1182_Weissrand track <500 (<100) n/a 1184_Barby undist., ripple obscured 100-900 (100-300) 1184_Kibnas undist, trough <500 n/a Color properties vary substantially from grain-tograin, indicating they are sourced from diverse lithologies. Four color classes commonly occur (Figure 1). Gray-blue opaque grains are most abundant on the ripples. Also typically observed in decreasing order of commonality are white opaque, red opaque, and translucent yellow grains. Rare but present are green, brown, and colorless translucent grains. In the fine fractions, in contrast, red and yellow grains are more prevalent than gray grains (Fig. 1). More in situ MAHLI measurements will clarify these relationships. Composition. As might be expected given the diverse sand grain colors observed, there is substantial chemical heterogeneity within the four locales measured by APXS, compared with observed chemical diversity within Gale and on Mars (Fig. 2). Interestingly, the Bagnold dunes are clear outliers due to low S, Ti and Mn. Lack of S suggests a paucity of dust. Otherwise, and as discussed further in [6], individual sand targets are individual, compositional outliers: Barby has the second highest Si in a Mars soil and Warsaw the highest Ni. Elevated Si, Al and alkalis in Barby may be due to alkali clasts. ChemCam has sampled a larger suite of fines in the Bagnold vicinity, finding elevated Si, alkalis, and iron in the finest fraction; coarse grains are generally mafic [5]. ChemCam passive spectra show absorptions indicating dominantly Fe(II) rather than Fe(III) and an overall mafic character. There are, as expected, subtle differences among ripple crest, trough, and disturbed sands in peak reflectance position and NIR slope from a ~700-nm peak [4]. So far, the data collectively support conclusions based on orbital data [2] that reptating grains within ripples are enriched in olivine mafics; in some instances, they may also be enriched in coarse felsic clasts (e.g. Barby). Future work: Within the coming weeks, a more detailed campaign at Namib dune—an active, olivineenriched dune, identified based on orbital data [2]—is planned, including CheMin and SAM measurements of samples sieved to <150µm and SAM measurements of the 150µm-1mm fraction. APXS, MAHLI and remote sensing of disturbed and undisturbed sands as well as 4-6 dump piles derived from  sample processing to 4 discrete, different grain size intervals are to be acquired. Collectively, the data will establish the size variance of sand volatile content and the size dependence of sediment chemistry/mineralogy. We expect to present these results at LPSC. Acknowledgements: Thanks to the many members of the MSL team whose operations work enables the Bagnold campaign. Ehlmann is supported by the MSL Participating Scientist program. References: [1] Bridges N. et al., this conf. [2] Lapotre et al., this conf. [3] Milliken RE et al., 2014, GRL. [4] Johnson et al., this conf. [5] Cousin et al, this conf. [6] O'Connell et al., this conf [7] Edgett et al., this conf [8] Morris et al 2008, JGR; refs therein [9] Yen et al., 2005, Nature 