 UPDATE ON THE SEASONAL ATMOSPHERIC COMPOSITION MEASUREMENTS BY THE SAMPLE ANALYSIS AT MARS INSTRUMENT. M. G. Trainer1, H. B. Franz1,2, P. R. Mahaffy1, M. H. Wong3,4, S. K. Atreya3, C. P. McKay5, P. G. Conrad1, C. A. Malespin1,6, J. L. Eigenbrode1, R. O. Pepin7, T. C. Owen8, H. L. K. Manning9, T. H. McConnochie2, F. J. Martin-Torres10,12, M.-P. Zorzano11,12, R. Navarro-Gonzalez13.  1NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771 (melissa.trainer@nasa.gov), 2University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20740,3University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 4University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, 5NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, 6Universities Space Research Association, Houston, TX 77058, 7University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 8University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822, 9Concordia College, Moorhead, MN 56562, 10Instituto Andaluz de Ciencias de la Tierra (CSIC-UGR), Granada, Spain, 11Centro de Astrobiología (INTA-CSIC), Madrid, Spain, 12	  Division of Space Technology, Department of Computer Science, Electrical and Space Engineering, Luleå University of Technology, Kiruna, Sweden,  13Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico.  Introduction: The Sample Analysis at Mars (SAM) instrument on Curiosity measures the chemical and isotopic composition of atmospheric volatiles in the vicinity of the rover through a dedicated atmospheric inlet [1]. The SAM Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer (QMS) is able to conduct a survey of the atmosphere to identify and quantify atmospheric species and isotope ratios; alternatively enrichment measurements are utilized to remove major and reactive species (CO2, O2, H2O, etc.) to allow for high precision measurements of trace species such as noble gases. When combined with composition and isotope data from gases trapped in martian meteorites, other lander and orbital missions, and meteorological measurements conducted by the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) Rover Environmental Monitoring Station (REMS) [2], the SAM atmosphere measurements inform our understanding of current atmospheric cycling and climate evolution over recent and geological time. SAM Atmospheric Measurement Details:  We report here on measurements of atmospheric volume mixing ratios on Mars using the SAM QMS onboard the MSL Curiosity rover, taken in Gale Crater (4.5°S, 137°E) over a period of more than one Mars year (> 3 Earth years) from landing [3].  The observation period spans the southern winter of MY 31, solar longitude (Ls) of 175° through southern fall (northern spring) of MY 33, Ls = 60°. During the measurement timeframe Curiosity traversed a distance of approximately 11.9 km in Gale Crater, spanning elevations from -18.7 to +93 m relative to the landing site. The SAM QMS atFigure 1. SAM Atmospheric QMS experiments are plotted with the atmospheric pressure measurement taken by REMS at or near time of ingestion (left axis) as a function of MSL mission sol (bottom axis) and solar longitude (top axis).  The experiments are identified by their ingestion time (closed triangles = nighttime, open triangles = daytime). The background is shaded by northern season, and the REMS daily pressure maximum and minimum values are given by the dotted lines. The solid black bars indicates the periods of time in 2013 and 2015 when Mars and Earth were in a superior solar conjunction and MSL activities were suspended.   mospheric measurements were taken periodically during this time, interspersed between solid sample measurements and other rover activities, with an average coverage of 2 experiments per season (Fig. 1). During a typical atmospheric experiment, a sample is ingested into a pre-evacuated manifold, preconditioned to 50°C. Background QMS measurements are taken of the evacuated instrument and manifold prior to introduction of the atmospheric sample. A valve to the sample inlet tube is then opened briefly (~30 seconds) to introduce atmospheric gas to a portion of the manifold. A small fraction of this gas is leaked into the QMS in a dynamic sampling mode (i.e., as the instrument is pumped by one of the turbomolecular pumps). Atmospheric mixing ratios measured by the SAM QMS were reported for the first 105 sols of the mission [4], and were updated to account for newly developed calibration factors [5].  Periodic sampling was continued to explore variations related to the seasonal CO2 cycle, as indicated by the annual pressure curves (Fig. 1). The SAM atmospheric measurements taken through MY33 Ls 60° overlap seasonally with the first reported measurements in MY 31, testing whether there is a repeatable annual cycle in the atmospheric composition. With the exception of two daytime runs (Fig. 1, open triangles), atmospheric ingestions were taken near local midnight.  Results:  The annual variations of the major atmospheric species, as monitored by SAM, provide insight on seasonal circulation patterns, global transport, and in some cases identify possible deviations from known atmospheric chemistry. Carbon dioxide cycle. Carbon dioxide is the primary component of the martian atmosphere, with large seasonal variations in the global surface density due to the condensation and sublimation of CO2 in the polar regions during local winter and spring.  The SAM mixing ratios are the first compositional measurements of the atmosphere, including CO2, that occur at intervals throughout this CO2 cycle. We find that despite the large pressure fluctuations, as expected CO2 is still the most dominant component of the atmosphere, with an average mixing ratio throughout the year of 0.959 +/- 0.002.  The uncertainty on this value represents the standard deviation of the average, and assumes that the seasonal variation in the CO2 mixing ratio is minimal. The seasonal trend is more evident in the CO2 partial pressure (Fig. 2b), in which the mixing ratio determined from the SAM QMS experiments is multiplied with the pressure at the ingestion time.  Here the calculated CO2 values show more clearly the compositional trace of polar cap formation.   Noncondensable atmospheric components. The mixing ratios of four other components of the martian atmosphere are also monitored throughout the seasonal cycle: argon (Ar), nitrogen (N2), oxygen (O2), and carbon monoxide (CO). These species are not condensable at Mars surface temperatures and pressures, and thus are not expected to deposit or sublime from the polar caps as does CO2.  However, there are seasonal trends in the relative mixing ratios of these molecules that are a response to both the change in the CO2 pressure as well as the transport and mixing of the large atmospheric mass during the seasonal CO2 cycle.  Argon and nitrogen serve as excellent tracers for this transport, since they are chemically inert in addition to remaining solely in the gas phase. The relative seasonal trends of these molecules has been consistent with known chemical and dynamical models. Carbon monoxide is present at 500-1000 ppm and displays similar seasonal behavior as Ar and N2.  The measured concentration for O2 varies between 1270 and 1800 ppmv. Even with the larger uncertainties on the derived O2 mixing ratios, there is a clear rise beginning in southern fall (northern spring), with an earlier onset than the other noncondensable species. This is a surprising result given the longer than one Mars year lifetime, and the assumption that on a seasonal time scale it should behave essentially as the other noncondensable gases. Observations during the southern for both MY 32 and MY 33 have shown this to be a repeated phenomenon. Comparisons with ChemCam Passive Sky observations of column O2 will be discussed [6]. Conclusions: The MSL/SAM investigation has conducted the first in situ survey of atmospheric mixing ratios spanning more than a Mars year. This unprecedented seasonal coverage and precision in mixing ratio determinations provides valuable data for understanding the seasonal chemical and dynamics cycles.  Further, this measurement campaign supplies useful ground-truth data for global climate model simulations which can study atmospheric effects for other locations on Mars as well as long-term evolution of Mars climate. References: [1] Mahaffy P. R. et al. (2012) Space Sci. Res., 170, 401-478. [2] Gómez-Elvira J. et al. (2012) Space Sci. Res., 170, 583-640. [3] Vasavada A. R. et al. (2014) J. Geophys. Res., 119, doi:	  10.1002/2014JE004622. [4] Mahaffy P. R. et al. (2013) Science, 341, 263. [5] Franz H. B. et al (2015) Planet. Space Sci., 109-110, 154. [6] McConnochie T. H. (2015) AGU 2015, Abstract # P22A-08. 