 MSL HOMING IN ON A LARGE SMECTITE CLAY DEPOSIT: AN ORBITAL PERSPECTIVE.   J. Carter 1 and B. Gondet 1 and Y. Langevin 1, 1 Institut d'Astrophysique Spatiale, CNRS/Université Paris-Saclay, France. john.carter@ias.u-psud.fr   Introduction: The in-situ analysis of hydrous clay minerals on Mars is one of the primary science objectives of MSL. Their analysis at Gale provides insight on the geochemistry of a localized, Hesperian-aged aqueous environment and may help with paleoclimatic reconstruction. Several drills along the traverse analyzed with CheMin have detected clays at Gale [1] and allowed their refined characterization compared to the broad view available until now with orbital spectroscopy. The lack of coordinated orbital detections of clays at Gale has deprived these analyses of an ensemble view and conversely, of the long awaited ground truth for remote sensing instruments (OMEGA, CRISM, TES). As of writing, MSL is now less than 400 meters from orbital detections of hydrous clays, or less than 2 km considering a feasible traverse. Here we present the orbital detections and discuss perspectives that would improve both in-situ analyses and orbital remote sensing of clays.  Method:  We analyzed all available CRISM high resolution targeted observations (<36 m/pix) in the vicinity of MSL. Each observation, from all types (FRT, FRS, HRL, ATO) is mosaicked unto an oversampled grid with a 5 m spacing. Manual geometric corrections are applied to insure pixels from different observations overlap with a precision better than 20 m. Each calibrated radiance cube is 'flattened' prior to mosaicking in order to remove residual systematics and enhance the weak aqueous mineral signatures [2]. This reduces spectral variance and results in a notable increase in signal to noise when several overlapping observations are stacked. A set of spectral indexes are applied to the mosaicked spectral cube which highlight combinations of spectral features diagnostic of specific mineral classes (e.g. smectites, hydrated silica, sulfate) while rejecting false positives induced by observational biases. Clusters of pixels with a positive detections of a specific mineral class are then verified by extracting the corresponding median spectrum.  Results:  Both Fe-rich smectites and hydrated silica are detected within the mosaic FOV, as shown in Fig 1. The aqueous minerals are found within the lower Mt Sharp Murray formation. Additional signatures of hydrated sulfates are considered likely, while there is some evidence for pixel-specific absorptions in the 2.25 µm region attributed to AlFe smectites. A similar band in non smectitic pixels could be related to jarosite or clay precursors (palagonite minerals, allophane). These clay detections in numerous clutsters of CRISM pixels ensures widespread and abundant clays (likely >20 vol%) for MSL. The commonly used spectral index method is statistically biased as it assumes a prior on the spectral position and width of these absorptions, which amplifies negative statistical excursions in noisy spectra and induces a spectral blur if several similar minerals are present. This effect is not negligible here and precludes the fine identification of the smectitic Metal-OH band centers. These signature are however similar to the high SNR clay spectra observed further up in the stratigraphy [3-6] (see spectrum #1 in figure).   Short term perspectives: The instrument suite on MSL provides detailed chemical, elemental and structural data on the mineral samples. The addition of CRISM spectra will make possible a more comprehensive view by adding a 'bulk' mineralogical dimension. 1. Quantitative predictions for MSL. The generally accepted interpretation for these clay spectra is Fe-rich smectites (nontronite), and their orbital detection higher up in the stratigraphy [3-6] was one of the primary rationales for sending MSL there. Nontronite has a chemical composition rich in Fe +3 and Al, but lacking in Mg. It is dominantly a surface to near surface aqueous alteration product. Weak additional bands in the 2.25 µm range may indicate that the clay is an Al+Fenontronite smectite. Pixel to pixel variability in the spectral bands should translate into subtle differences both in the structure and composition of these clays. ChemCam measurements may determine the interlayer cation composition (foreseen to be mostly Na and Ca, with H2O). The Fe 3+ -OH band position < 2.30 µm and the presence of a weak AlFe-OH band near 2.25 µm should translate into distinct values of Al# ratio = Fe/(Al+Fe) as calibrated in [7]: total Al#<0.75 when the CRISM AlFe-OH band is present, close to 1 otherwise; and if only considering octahedral cations: Al# 0.6-0.9 (AlFe-OH & Fe-OH) versus Al# >0.9 (Fe-OH). The interlayer spacing as measured by CheMin should vary as a function of charge with Al/Fe substitutions in the smectite octahedra and tetrahedral. Interpretations on the geochemistry of the formation environment(s) are not identical depending on all the above variations. Note that these smectites are foreseen to differ from those of Yellowknife Bay [8]. Other ambiguities remain from CRISM spectra, both on the structure (crystallinity) and fine chemical composition (minor spe cies) of these clay signatures, which APXS, ChemCam and CheMin will alleviate. 2. Ground truth for orbital interpretations. A possibility exists for the mis-interpretation of such CRISM spectra as nontronite-bearing, which would have broad consequences for remote sensing of Mars as a whole. Possible contenders include Fe-montmorillonite, and poorly crystalline precursor clays such as allophane. A type of ferrous or ferric saponite (nominally a Mg-rich smectite) which spectral features have been modified by exposure to the Martian environment is also a (remote) possibility.   3. Calibrating abundance models. An interesting perspective is the possibility of calibrating abundance models developed for orbital spectroscopic data [4]. The radiative abundance model evaluation rely on assumptions on physical mixtures and optical constants from to-be-confirmed mineral endmembers. This could be verified and improved with a representative number of abundance measurements carried out over the first cm of the surface with MSL and extrapolated to the CRISM pixel scale (12-18 m) with the support of HIRISE imagery.    4. Relevance to Mars. The spectral class likely to be associated to Al-nontronite bearing clays is not the most common hydrous clay on Mars [9], but it is concentrated in large deposits which formation environment was highly leached (e.g. Mawrth Vallis, Nili Fossae) and/or mildly acidic when it co-occurs with large sulfate deposits (e.g. Valles Marineris, Meridiani Planum). Murray/Gale is therefore likely relevant to the latter case and the in-situ characterization of the chemistry (especially minor cations), crystallinity and stratigraphic context will provide insight to those regions of Mars.    Conclusions: After the Bagnold olivine-rich dunes campaign then the crossing of the Murray buttes formation where tentative clay detections are made from orbit, hydrous smectites should be readily accessible by MSL. Spectral signatures for clays are observed within the Murray formation, immediately to the south-east and south-west of the buttes. Extrapolation of CRISM detections based on HiRISE color imagery indicates that similar clays are likely present at least a few 10s of meters ahead of CRISM pixels. If a purely southward traverse right after passing the buttes is implemented instead, MSL would cross either very weak to no orbital detections of clays in the near term, although another clay unit is present above Hematite ridge, an extra >3 km traverse south of Murray Buttes.  References: [1] Bish D. et al., IUCrJ, 1(6) (2014) [2] Carter J. et al., PSS, 76 (2013) [3] Milliken R. et al., GRL, 37(4) (2010) [4] Poulet F. et al., Icarus, 231 (2014) [5] Fraeman A. et al., 46th LPSC, #2124 (2015) [6] Fraeman A. et al., GCA A.M., 21-2 (2015) [7] Petit S. et al., App. Clay Sci., 104 (2015) [8] Bristow T. et al., AM, 100 (2015) [9] Carter J. et al., JGR, 118(4) (2013)   Figure 1. CRISM mineral map of hydrated minerals (blue) and strongest smectite signatures (orange) along the MSL traverse. Spectral rationale from ROIs within the scene are given (right). Background and traverse : NASA.  unconfirmed 