 Electron Probe Microanalysis, Micro X-Ray Diffraction, and Deuterium-Hydrogen Analysis of Hydrous Alteration in Martian Meteorites Northwest Africa 10416 and 8159   Z. Vaci1, H.E. Newsom1, C.B. Agee1, A.J. Brearley1, O. Tschauner2, C.D.K. Herd3.  1Institute of Meteoritics, Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, 2Department of Geoscience, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV, 3Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB.  Introduction:  Recent data gathered by science missions on Mars overwhelmingly support the idea that Martian crust once held a substantial amount of water that exerted a prominent influence on its geological evolution.  Geochemical analyses of Martian meteorites that have experienced aqueous alteration can supplement these data sets and provide a level of precision not possible with remote rover analyses.  They can also serve as analogs for data gathered by future missions studying the Martian hydrologic cycle.  Two Martian meteorites found recently in northwest Africa, NWA 8159 and NWA 10416, show signs of 'iddingsite' hydrous alteration.  The altered zones will be subjected to various microanalytical techniques in order to understand the types and extent of hydrous alteration present at or near the Martian surface. NWA 8159 is an augite basalt, while NWA 10416 is an olivine-phyric basalt, both of which have been confirmed to be of Martian origin via oxygen isotope analysis.  They are both composed primarily of augite, orthopyroxene, plagioclase + maskelynite, olivine, and various oxides.  The two meteorites are potentially genetically related due to the similarities of their oxygen isotope profiles and the chemical compositions of their pyroxenes, which could form a single fractional crystallization trend (Fig. 1). Electron Probe Microanalysis: NWA 10416 contains large (1-2 mm) olivine phenocrysts which are visible in hand specimen and clearly show signs of iddingsite alteration.  Electron backscatter and qualitative elemental maps of these regions were created using the JEOL-8200 Superprobe at the University of New Mexico.  These show distinct zones of high aluminium and iron and low silica and magnesium (Fig. 2).  The alteration does not appear to be connected with the terrestrial weathering of the meteorite, visible as high Ca calcite zones in the fractures.  Because of the similarities of the meteorites, electron microanalysis was performed on the olivines in NWA 8159, which are microcrystalline, to see whether similar alteration could be found.  The elemental maps created show analogous alteration patterns (Fig. 3), though they approach the resolution limits of the electron microprobe.  Quantitative elemental analysis was also performed on altered points within the olivine grains which returned low totals for oxide percentages on the order of 88-92 weight percent, suggesting the presence of hydrated mineral phases (Fig. 4).  Figure 2. Electron backscatter and qualitative elemental WDS maps showing hydrous iddingsite alteration in the core of an olivine grain in NWA 10416.  Figure 3. Electron backscatter and qualitative elemental WDS maps showing iddingsite alteration in microcrystalline olivine grain in NWA 8159.  Altered zones are darker grey in backscatter and Al- and Mgdepleted in WDS. Figure 1. Pyroxene chemistry of NWA 10416 (previously referred to as MAC 138) and NWA 8159  Figure 4.  Electron backscatter map showing iddingsite alteration in NWA 8159 olivine grain.  Image is 250 µm wide. Micro X-ray Diffractometry:  NWA 10416 was analyzed by µXRD at the Advanced Photon Source, ANL, Illinois (Fig. 5).  A grid scan at beamline 13-IDE (GSECARS) was conducted over a single olivine grain using a 25 keV beam over an area of 2×3 µm.  The rim zones and kernel exhibited crystalline orientation typical for olivine crystals that display mosaicity.  In the kernel regions, a transition from a mosaic crystal to a highly textured fine-grained aggregate of olivine was observed.  A second phase with similarly pronounced texture was also observed.  Unit cell dimensions could be obtained and a set of 549 reflections was used for modelling.  This second phase was identified as Mgbearing laihunite (Fe5.06Mg0.96Si3.72O16, P 1 21/c 1, a = 5.794 Å, b = 4.727 Å, c = 10.292 Å, β = 91.20°).   The water content of this phase could not be determined from the structure analysis.  However, in the absence of OH-bonds, all iron must be ferric to maintain charge balance.  Laihunite is a hydrothermal alteration product of fayalitic olivine rather than a weathering product [1].     Since there is no hydrothermal alteration occurring on the surface of the Sahara desert where the meteorite was found, the alteration is assumed to be Martian.  Hydrogen Isotope Analysis:  Similar alteration appears to exist within the olivine grains in both NWA 10416 and NWA 8159, though at different scales.  Unlike previously catalogued iddingsite alteration in Martian meteorites, such as in Nakhla [2], the alteration seems to be confined to the center of the olivine grains rather than along fractures.  Because the iddingsite does not necessarily overlap with the terrestrial calcite deposits along fractures, it is thought to be a product of hydrothermal alteration which would only have been possible on Mars.  To test this, iddingsite in NWA 10416 was manually extracted and its deuterium to hydrogen ratios were measured using a Delta V TC/EA mass spectrometer at the University of New Mexico. The results of the mass spectrometry returned δ2H ratios around -140 permil, while the Martian atmosphere generally shows values between 0 and 4000.  Thus the iddingsite in NWA 10416 shows terrestrial contamination, likely because the structurally weakened altered zones were more susceptible to infiltration by meteoric water.  This does not preclude Martian hydrothermal alteration, as the northwest African desert climate does not adequately explain the degree of olivine core alteration in the meteorite. Discussion:  While laihunite has been identified as one of the hydrothermal phases, the alteration in NWA 8159 and 10416 displays microcrystalline texture that requires further analysis by instruments capable of higher resolution analysis.  Therefore sections will be cut from both meteorites using focused ion beam milling.  These sections will be viewed under a transmission electron microscope so that additional phases may be identified.  To constrain the Martian origin of the alteration in NWA 8159, D/H analysis via secondary ion mass spectroscopy (nanoSIMS) will be necessary, since the affected olivine grains in the sample are microcrystalline. References: [1] Herd et al. (2016) This Meeting [2] M.R. Lee et al. (2015) Geochimica, 154, 49-65. Acknowledgements:  Meteorite samples provided by the University of New Mexico Meteorite Museum and the Institute of Meteoritics.  Funding for ChemCam Co-investigator Newsom provided by NASA/JPL.  Figure 5. XRD spectra for olivine (left) and olivine/laihunite as a textured fine-grained aggregate (right).  