 OVERVIEW OF THE 2015 CANMARS MARS SAMPLE RETURN ANALOGUE MISSION. G. R. Osinski1,2, R. Francis1, P. Fulford3, T. Haltigin4, M. C. Kerrigan1, A. Pontefract1, E. A. Silber1,2, L. L. Tornabene1, and the 2015 CanMars Team, 1Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration / Dept. of Earth Sciences, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, apontefr@uwo.ca. 2Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. 3MDA, Brampton, ON, Canada. 4Canadian Space Agency, St- Hubert, QC, Canada.  Introduction:  One of the highest priority goals for the international planetary science communities is the return of samples from known locations on Mars [1, 2]. Such a Mars Sample Return (MSR) mission will be one of the most challenging planetary exploration missions to date and must involve the international community. In order to position Canada to participate in a future MSR mission a series of ground prototypes for surface mobility and associated science instruments and other peripheral elements were developed through the CSA's Exploration Surface Mobility project. The 2015 CanMars deployment simulated portions of an MSR mission, and was conducted to develop and test planetary surface operational requirements for science instruments, science support equipment and mission platforms in a realistic scenario. A parallel goal was to provide a unique training experience to Canadian students and postdoctoral fellows in order to prepare them for participation in future planetary exploration missions. The 2015 CanMars mission was executed at a field site in Utah, USA - known for its unique Mars analogue attributes - but that was unknown to the mission control team located at the University of Western Ontario (Western), London, Ontario, Canada. It was conducted over two weeks in November 2015. The 2015 CanMars mission was a unique partnership between the CSA, MacDonald Dettwiler and Associates Ltd. (MDA), and the Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration (CPSX) at Western as part of the NSERC CREATE project "Technologies and Techniques for Earth and Space Exploration" (http://create.uwo.ca ). This is the third such MSR analogue mission carried out by CSA, MDA and the CREATE team, with the 2013 and 2014 deployments being conducted in a simulated Mars terrain at the CSA headquarters in St. Hubert, Quebec, Canada. The driving paradigm for this 2015 MSR analogue mission was that real science should be conducted, thus the choice of a site in Utah for this deployment. This mission represents the highest-fidelity analogue mission conducted by Canadian teams to-date.  Team Structure and Operational Architecture: Over 50 participants from six institutions were divided into three teams worked on this analogue mission. The Mission Control (MC) team was responsible for the science planning, processing, and interpretation, was based at Western - the MC team was further split into Science, Planning and Tactical sub-teams. The CSA team, with responsibility for the Mars Exploration Science Rover (MESR) operations was based at the CSA headquarters. The Field team and the MESR was deployed in Utah. Kerrigan et al. [3] provide a overview of the mission control team structure and operations.  Fig. 1. The MESR rover at the analogue site in Utah. Silbur et al. [4] provide further details on the Tactical operations. In Francis et al. [5], details on the exploration on decision-making rules and resources for the CanMars mission are provided. Cross et al. [6] provide the detailed results of science activity resource planning. Daily activity planning was conducted using an environmental simulation software package called Symphony designed by the CSA [see Sapers et al. [7] for further details). This software integrates rover localization, Feature of Interest definition, and the ability to visualize activity and planning constraints. Science Objectives and Overview:  This was a science-driven MSR analogue mission. The site was chosen based on a lengthy process and was visited by key personnel in order to determine its suitability for this mission from both a scientific and engineering perspective. The Science team was provided with the following mission goals: 1) to collect a minimum of one sample, and 2) satisfy two sub-goals from the MEPAG objectives for Goals I and III; Habitability and Crustal Processes, respectively [8]. Pontefract et al. [9] provide a detailed overview of the science objectives for this analogue mission and their evolution from pre-mission hypotheses to in situ science. Pre-mission science was conducted with visible and multispectral satellite datasets. From these datasets, the science team developed a hypothesis for prominent sinuous ridges present in the landing ellipse, which was that they represent possible inverted paleochannels preserved through the deposition of an erosion-resistant cap rock.  During the mission, the rover traversed a total of 253 m over 11 Sols and the team was able to collect four samples (3 rock samples and 1 regolith). Further details on the mapping results and interpreted stratigraphy are given by Christoffersen et al. [10] and Morse et al. [11]. The final step in this process is to compare the interpretations based on rover-collected data to those made from boots-on-the-ground collected data, which will serve to address the fidelity of rover-based science interpretations. This includes analysis of samples in a laboratory setting, which is ongoing Rover platform and Instrumentation:  The 2015 CanMars mission used a suite of off-the-shelf "standin" and integrated instruments onboard the CSA Mars Exploration Science Rover (MESR) built by MacDonald, Dettwiler and Associates Ltd. (MDA). MastCam. MESR's Mast Cameras (Mastcam) consists of a stereo camera with zoom capabilities. As with many past and current space missions, the imaging capabilities were critical for the interpretations of the science team (see [12] for further details). Lidar. While it has not been used for past or ongoing rover missions, lidar is under consideration for future missions. A mast-mounted lidar was used during the CanMars mission. Zylberman et al. [13] discuss the results of this instrument and demonstrate that lidar has a key role in rover navigation and path planning (e.g., to provide estimates of distances, heights and slopes). Our work also shows that lidar also allows extremely detailed surface mapping of objects and, therefore, has implications for science operations [13].  TEMMI. The Three-Dimensional Exploration Multispectral Microscopic Imager (TEMMI) was an integrated instrument. TEMMI is an advanced prototype and consists of a monochrome camera mounted to a microscope objective. Attached are three identical LED-based illumination units making TEMMI independent of natural lighting as well as a digital light processor (DLP)-based video projector with a white LED and an objective. Two imaging modes are implemented for colour and fluorescence imaging, the low-resolution mode providing a field of view (FOV) of 5.7 x 4.3 mm with optical resolution of ≤ 10 µm (4.4 µm pixel resolution) while the high-resolution mode provides a FOV of 5.7 x 2.1 mm with ≤ 5 µm optical resolution (2.2 µm pixel resolution). Two sites were analyzed by TEMMI during the mission, details of which are provided in [14]. X-Ray Fluorescence. A Bruker hand-held X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF) was among the stand-in instruments. The functionality of the XRF was modeled after the MSL ChemCam instrument. As such, it was used as a mast-mounted stand-off instrument. The XRF was important for geologic characterization of the analogue site through in situ outcrop and regolith geochemical measurements. Throughout the duration of the analogue mission, 113 XRF-derived geochemical data suites were collected. For further details see Caudill et al. [15]. Raman Spectroscopy.  A Raman spectrometer was also included in the rover payload to simulate use of the SuperCam instrument during the Mars 2020 mission, which will also include a Raman spectrometer. During the CanMars mission, the instrument was used as a mast-mounted stand-off instrument that could be used up to a 13 m range. Raman proved to be an essential part of the payload and details are provided in Mittelholz et al. [16]. Public Education, Outreach and Immersive Technologies: As with actual space missions, public education and outreach was a priority for this analogue mission. This was achieved  through a strong presence on social media (primarily Twitter and Facebook); attention on local, regional, and national news networks; and interaction with the local community. The Twitter results were particularly impressive. From November 15th to December 5th, 1,794 tweets utilized the #CanMars hashtag, with a reach of 2,618,818. Full details are provided in Hill et al. [17]. In addition to the above education and outreach activities, two experimental immersive technologies were used during the mission: 1) A Google Cardboard virtual reality headset with motion sensitive stereographically projected versions of panoramic images taken by the rover, and 2) an easily navigable dynamically lit 3D terrain model also projected stereographically through a motion sensitive VR platform. Both of these technologies were used for  education and outreach activities but they also aided in making science team decisions (see Morse et al. [18] for details). Acknowledgements: Thank you to the entire 2015 CanMars team, whose hard work and dedication made this mission a success. This work was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada's CREATE program and the Canadian Space Agency. References: [1] The Global Exploration Strategy: The Framework for Coordination. [2]  The MEPAG Next Decade Science Analysis Group. (2008) Astrobiology 8: 489-535. [3] Kerrigan et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [4] Silbur et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [5] Francis et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [6] Cross et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [7] Sapers et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [8] MEPAG Goals Committee (2015) MEPAG Goals Document. [9] Pontefract et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [10] Christoffersen et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [11] Morse et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [12] Harrison et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [13] Zylberman et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [14] Ryan et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [15] Caudill et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [16] Mittleholtz et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [17] Hill et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [18] Morse et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. 