  EXPLORATION AND DECISION-MAKING RULES AND RESOURCES ON THE 2015 CANMARS MSR ANALOGUE MISSION: AN ANALOGUE FOR MARS 2020 ROVER OPERATIONS. R. Francis1,2,3, M. D. G. Cross1,2, M. C. Kerrigan1,4, G. R. Osinski1,4, 1Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration (CPSX), University of Western Ontario, 2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Western Ontario, 3Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4Department of Earth Science, University of Western Ontario (raymond.francis@jpl.nasa.gov)  Introduction: The 2015 CanMars MSR Analogue Mission [1] was a high-fidelity analogue field deployment testing techniques for Mars Sample Return (MSR), focused on the exploration, scientific analysis, and sample caching tasks. The analogue mission was conceived as an analogue test for the Mars 2020 sample caching rover operations and those of similar mission proposals. The deployment featured a meaningful Mars analogue field site, a realistic, MSL-scale rover with integrated mast-mounted cameras and robotic arm carrying a micro-imager and a sampling system, and a full remote mission control team [1, 2].  A key goal of the analogue mission was to test and exercise the science instruments and rover in a realistic setting, to investigate and demonstrate their utility in the science investigation. Doing so requires that they be used in a realistic way - that decisions made using acquired data, and decisions about which data to acquire next, are plausible with regards to what can be achieved with a remotely-operated robotic mission.  To this end, task dependencies, resource costs, and other 'flight rules' constraining mission planning were carefully considered prior to the deployment, and tested in dry-run plan development at the Mission Control facility. The design of these rules is described in this abstract. Including remote science for the first time: The Mars 2020 rover will carry SuperCam, a suite of mastmounted standoff science instrumentation including laser-induced breakdown spectrometer (LIBS), Raman spectrometer, infrared spectrometer, and remote microimager (RMI) [3]. Experience from the Mars Science Laboratory mission has shown that the similar ChemCam (LIBS+RMI) instrument has proven important in shaping the investigation and decision process used in exploring Gale Crater [4]. In addition to its intrinsic value for geochemistry, because ChemCam data is obtained at relatively low resource cost (especially mission time and power) compared to contact instruments, it can be used to inform decisions about where to conduct more resource-intensive activities such as contact science measurements and sampling. It is anticipated that SuperCam will play a similar role on Mars 2020. For this reason, the 2015 analogue deployment included remote geochemical instruments in the simulation. Since a remote LIBS/Raman/IR spectrometer was not available for integration aboard the rover, this capability was simulated by the use of handheld instruments - a Raman spectrometer [5], and an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF) [6] standing in for LIBS. This was a novel experiment - the precursor tests in a constructed analogue terrain, and previous field experiments [7] did not include remote geochemical tools in the simulation. Task types and dependencies: Science activities planned by the mission control team were of three types, each with different constraints. 1) Imaging with mast-mounted cameras: The team was required to specify pointing angles in either rover-relative, or 'local level' (site geographic) co-ordinates, by azimuth and elevation. Autofocus and autoexposure were assumed. This allowed the team to take targeted images of features of interest, if the rover had not moved since the features were seen, or to take images with estimated pointing of regions of interest post-drive. The team was also able to command photographic panoramas by specifying the azimuth span. 2) Remote science: XRF (as LIBS) and Raman required the team to choose specific points on the terrain to measure. Doing so requires imagery of sufficient resolution to identify points of interest, taken in a preceding command cycle and downlinked. It also requires an estimate of the range to the target, and its position relative to the rover, meaning 3D information (derived from scanning lidar [8]) was also needed from a previous command cycle. The team was permitted to request XRF data on any target within 7 m of the rover (the maximum range of ChemCam LIBS), and Raman data out to 12 m (similar to the expected range for SuperCam Raman). 3) Contact science and sampling: As for remote science, 3D information and high-resolution imagery of the measurement site is required for planning. These observations were required to be from the same rover worksite - not from a previous drive location - since any error in target localization from rover motion could be catastrophic when attempting to place contact instruments on a rock. (In practice, because of limited overlap of the rover's lidar field of   view and arm workspace, the field team was permitted to slightly reposition the rover when required. This was, after all, the first field test of this rover and its manipulator arm, and the full placement capabilities were thus still under test.) "Touch and go" operations, in which contact science is followed by stowing the arm and driving away, were permitted. The reverse order was not permitted - after a drive, ground-in-the-loop was required before attempting contact science work. Targeting remote science instruments: Nominally, remote science measurements were groundtargeted, using imagery and 3D data from previous command cycles. Autonomous target selection as in [9] was not assumed - the science team was required to fully specify targets. However, in order to save ground-in-the-loop cycles and allow more exercises of the end-to-end exploration decision process in a short 11-cycle simulation, a limited drive of a few metres was permitted before targeted science observations. This was justified by the assumption that a capability for visual target tracking (VTT) will exist on Mars 2020, as it does on Mars Science Laboratory [4] and has on Mars Exploration Rovers since 2007 [10]. Postshort-drive remote science was performed on three occasions. Another allowed option was 'blind targeted' remote science, where the azimuth and elevation are specified, but the actual post-drive target is unknown. Modeled on the existing ChemCam capability [11] this was used once, for soil observations after a long drive. Balancing resource costs: The mission control team was required to constrain the plans with limits on three resources: time, energy, and data. The costs associated with each resource were carefully scaled to provide realistic trade-offs, since these costs, along with scientific goals and interpretations, will influence the team's choices of activities. 1) Time: Robotic activity (driving, arm motion, and sampling) and imaging durations were taken from as-run values with MESR, with margin. Remote science activity durations were modeled on durations of ChemCam activities on MSL and the field instrument stand-ins, with times for instrument power-up, individual measurements, and power-down. 2) Data: Data budgets for imaging were for the actual image files, with no overhead. For robotics, engineering data values from MESR were used. For remote science, analogies to ChemCam were made. 3) Energy: Detailed modeling of potential sol plans was conducted; particular types of plans were identified that should be 'possible', 'challenging' or 'impossible' given realistic resource constraints. The energy costs for robotic activities were scaled to each other and the total budget to create those conditions, should the team choose to plan as projected. The energy costs for remote science and imaging were modeled on ChemCam, with LIBS (simulated by XRF) requiring more energy than remote Raman spectroscopy, and much more than photography. Shortened timeline, preserved decision paths: The Mars 2020 rover will take two years or more, with hundreds of command cycles, to collect and cache 2030+ samples. This simulation lasted two weeks, with 11 command cycles. It was thus necessary to shorten the timeline of decision-making in order to run through the exploration process all the way to sampling several times. Care was taken to preserve the decision paths and task dependencies. While extensive multi-cycle ground-in-the-loop engineering assessments before drilling (for example) were not performed, the team still proceeded stepwise through exploration tasks.  For example, the team would notice a distant outcrop on one cycle, drive towards it using 1-3 cycles, imaging it on the last cycle, then on the next conduct remote science and drive to position for contact activities, and complete contact work on the subsequent 1-2 cycles. The outcomes of the mission planning using these constraints are described in [12]. Conclusions: Careful design provided a realistic scenario that influenced decision-making in mission control in important ways, and may be useful for considering the sampling and exploration strategies to be used in the Mars 2020 sample caching mission. The inclusion of remote science instruments was a valuable exercise, which significantly affected exploration strategy and enhanced team understanding of the field site, and should be considered for future simulations. Acknowledgements: This work was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada's CREATE program and the Canadian Space Agency. References: [1] Osinski G. et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII. This conf. [2] Kerrigan M. et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII. This conf. [3] Gasnault O. (2015) LPSC XLVI #2990 [4] Francis R. et al. (2015) IEEE AIPR Oct 2015, [5] Mittelholz et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII. This conf. [6] Caudill et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII. This conf. [7] Marion C. et al. (2012) LPSC XLIV #2333, [8] Hickon D. et al., (2016) LPSC XLVII This conf., [9] Francis R. et al., (2016) LPSC XLVII This conf., [10] Kim W. et al (2008) i-SAIRAS IX, [11] Cousin A. et al (2014) LPSC XLV #1278 [12] Cross M. et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII. This conf. 