 MARS SEDIMENTARY ROCK METROLOGY FROM MAHLI QUANTITATIVE RELIEF MODELS.  J. B. Garvin1, K. S. Edgett2, D. M. Fey2, R. Dotson5, J. Frawley4 , M. R. Kennedy2,  G. M. Krezoski2, M. E. Minitti3;   1NASA Goddard  (NASA GSFC, Greenbelt, MD 20771; james.b.garvin@nasa.gov), 2MSSS, San Diego, CA, 3Planetary Sciences Institute, Tucson, AZ, 4HBG at NASA's GSFC, 5Fireball at NASA's GSFC.  Introduction: For rocks on a planetary body surface, the quantitative morphology (i.e., relief) of the exposed rock at sub-millimeter, petrographic scales is a function of inherent rock and grain properties (formative and diagenetic processes) that have acted in concert with physical and chemical weathering and erosion (modificative processes) of that surface [1]. The nature of the materials and processes will vary as a function of the nature of the world on which the rock occurs. Rock textural elements (e.g., grains, cements, vugs, vesicles) of differing physical properties respond to weathering and erosion differently. For example, on Mars, wind erosion enhances subtleties in the inhomogeneity of exposed, very fine-grained sedimentary rocks (e.g., mudstones in Gale crater [2]). On Earth, repeated monitoring of such surfaces, over time, can yield information about weathering and erosion rates [3]. Such measurements can also provide information regarding habitable rock surfaces (and/or micro-scale sub-surfaces) and the interaction of the rock surface with biology [4], as well as feed into documentation of where observations were made or samples extracted relative to 3-D reconstructions of bedding, stratigraphic relations, and global coordinate systems.  The Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) payload includes the Mars Hand Lens Imager (MAHLI) [5] and the Mars 2020 rover SHERLOC investigation includes WATSON, a duplicate of MAHLI. In support of MAHLI and future WATSON science and sample extraction and documentation efforts, we have, since October 2015, been exploring the use of MAHLI as a rock surface 3-D metrology Quantitative Relief Model (QRM) system. We acquire 5 individual overlapping color images arranged a "+" pattern with 0.4 cm offsets, permitting analysis of sub-millimeter-scale texture using engineering metrology techniques [6]. Here, we showcase our earliest MAHLI 5-image QRM experiments designed to assess the scientific quality and the "noise floor" of the system by analysis of six clastic sedimentary rock surfaces acquired at ~31 m/pixel scale within patches ~ 4.9 cm x 3.8 cm in area.  MAHLI Stereo QRM Imaging:  The focusable color MAHLI camera can acquire sub-mm spatial resolution images of martian geologic materials from its location on the turret on the Curiosity rover arm.  We acquired multiple 5-frame MAHLI stereo overlapping images in a cruciform pattern ("+") on sols 1130, 1150, 1157, 1166, and 1184 that survey an array of different sedimentary rock surface morphologies. These initial examples reflect the potential for measuring textures at < 0.10 mm vertical scales for geologic materials of scientific importance, ideally associated with independent measurements of chemistry.  Further 5frame QRM's are planned after rigorous analysis of the vertical error budget intrinsic to the MAHLI stereo imaging configuration (5-frames) and geologic assessment.  Our focus here is on a first-order characterization of QRM's for different rock surface morphologies and extractable geologic information pertaining to the evolution of individual rock surfaces.  Initial QRM-5 Experiment (Greenhorn):  On Sol 1130 a preliminary 5-frame MAHLI stereo imaging experiment was conducted to evaluate the quality of derived QRM's for potential further scientific utilization during the MSL Extended Mission and using the WATSON camera on the Mars 2020 rover mission. The experiment was designed to allow for multi-angle (5 frames) MAHLI stereo-overlap-imaging of the highsilica Greenhorn rock surface after DRT brushing and prior to drilling for SAM/CheMin analysis.  Greenhorn was selected on the basis of its interesting geochemistry from APXS and ChemCam, as well as its finely-layered, coarse-grained sandstone (Stimson) appearance.     Figure 1:  Sol 1130 MAHLI QRM imaging experiment with resulting relief model (QRM) for the Greenhorn sandstone.  The 5 frames overlapped a 4.9 x 3.8 cm patch of the Greenhorn rock surface from a standoff of 5 cm and produced a 0.06 mm gridded relief model with a statistical noise level (vertical) of < 0.03 mm.  As illustrated in Fig. 1, the resulting QRM relief model of Greenhorn displays an organized array of relief elements, arranged in a quasi-linear pattern with a total dynamic range of < 2.4 mm.  The subtle layering that is visible in individual MAHLI images  is expressed as relief, suggesting offsets less than 0.5 mm. The distribution of local slopes for this rock surface is  dominated by the tilted layers that run left-to-right, suggesting a more recently exposed rock surface than others in this region.  Using methods borrowed from engineering metrology standardized analysis, we have examined the textures of the Greenhorn rock in terms of facet distributions (slope azimuth), cumulative distribution of relief elements after normalization (to a mean reference level), and for periodic patterns in the sub-mm relief. The total variance of local relief is ~ 0.45 mm, but when normalized to a mean local reference level, the value is 0.24 mm, which appears to represent an effective statistical parameter associated with grainsize for the sandstone surface.  MAHLI QRM analysis:  Our emphasis has been on evaluating the utility of sub-mm relief models (QRMs) at spatial scales of < 0.10 mm for different rock and sand patches.  This initial analysis showcases the potential vertical precision limits of the MAHLI stereo imaging for quantifying process-related surface textures, and the potential for identifying specific roughness signatures.   It is recognized that the sample size of six rocks is incomplete but the analysis to date illustrates the potential.  Of particular interest are variations in residual relief after normalizing each QRM to a mean reference relief level.  Figure 2 illustrates the spatial differences, and suggests that standard deviation of residual relief across the QRM's for surfaces represents an objective measure of "geologic texture". In this case, the Swartkloofberg mudstone exhibits a value of 0.061 mm (SD z') which ~15% larger than coarse sand (0.053 mm).  Such quantitative differences are easily measured in the residual QRMs. In contrast, the laminated Swartkloofberg mudstone illustrated in Fig. 2 is vastly different than the Greenhorn sandstone.  In this case the mudstone exhibits a roughness of ~ 0.061 mm relative to that at Greenhorn (0.24 mm).   It is also instructive to examine the angular distribution of "facets" at different scales for these rock surfaces.  We can compute the directional distribution of slopes for the rock surfaces (QRM) and measure patterns and their degree of organization. For Greenhorn, the azimuths of dominant facet orientations are clearly separated by 90 degrees, documenting the orthogonal pattern of tilted layers and cross-cutting features.  Figure 2: MAHLI residual QRM's for mudstone (Swartkloofberg) versus Barby coarse sand (sol 1184).  Note the layered pattern in the mudstone at left (sol 1166).   Comparative QRM Analysis:   We can compare the QRM's from the six rock surfaces using cumulative relief analysis methods.   For the smooth mudstones and the Ellis Canyon sandstone, the distributions are nearly identical, but offset from other surfaces. When comparing the slope azimuth distributions for the linearly-textured Greenhorn versus Swartkloofberg, it is evident that non-random distributions can be discriminated.  From these preliminary assessments, we conclude that sub-mm quantitative relief patterns and potentially "signatures" can be measured by means of MAHLI-derived QRM's, and that to first order statistical differences may be associated with key geologic processes.  Further analysis using terrestrial sedimentary rocks measured by means of GSFC metrology scanners are underway for comparison with MAHLI QRM's to isolate specific patterns associated with processes operating at the rock-atmosphere interface on Mars. Conclusion and Future Work:  Experimental MAHLI QRM's demonstrate vertical precision levels better than 0.03 mm at spatial scales of < 0.1 mm.  Quantitative metrology-based analysis of such QRM's is a first step beyond routine, qualitative anaglyph evaluation, and offers the possibility of new boundary conditions for micro-relief analysis of the origin of rock textures on Mars.  References: [1] Gómez-Pujol, L., et al. (2006) Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 31, 1792-1801. [2] Stack, K. M., et al (2014) JGR 119 (7) 1635-1664. [3] Moses, C., et al (2014) Earth Science Reviews, 135, 141-161. [4] Gorbushina A. & W. Broughton (2009) Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 63, p. 431-450 [5] Edgett, K.S. et al. (2012), Space Sci. Rev., doi: 10.1007/s11214-0129910-4. [6] Leach R. (2013) Char. Areal Surface Texture, Springer, 355 pp. 