 PHYSICAL AND MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF GALE CRATER SANDY DEPOSITS: FROM ROCKNEST TO PAHRUMP.  A. A. Fraeman 1, R. E. Arvidson 2, B. L. Ehlmann 1,3 ,  N. T. Bridges 4, B. Clark 5, A. Cousin 6, D. Des Marais 7, R. Gellert 8, J. R. Johnson 4, M.G.A. Lapotre 1, S. Schröder 9, N. T. Stein 2, R. Sullivan 10 , and D. Wellington 11 1 Caltech (afraeman@caltech.edu; M.S. 150-21, 1200 E. California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125), 2 Washington University in St. Louis, 3 JPL, 4 JHU/APL, 5 Space Science Institute, 6 LANL, 7 NASA AMES, 8 Unviersity of Guelph, , 9 IRAP, 10 Cornell University, 11 Arizona State University  Introduction:  The Curiosity Mars rover has encountered several aeolian ripples along the way to Mt. Sharp. Whereas Curiosity easily traversed some of these features, it had to drive around others due to increased wheel sinkage and associated high rover slip that occurred during attempted crossings [1, 2]. Here we combine orbital and ground-based datasets to understand the physical and compositional properties of these aeolian materials and consider the influence of these factors as well as traverse geometry in determining Curiosity's ability to cross ripples. The view from orbit: The Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM) on the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) has collected hyperspectral data over much of Curiosity's traverse in an along-track oversampled manner that can be projected down to 9 m/pixel [3] and that covers wavelengths from 0.4 - 1.0 µm. Mapping of spectral endmembers in these data show Curiosity's traverse lies in a mixing zone between bright dusty plains material and Mt. Sharp bedrock, as discussed by [4] (Fig. 1)  Fig 1:  (Top) Locations of distinct spectral endmembers in CRISM scenes over Curiosity's traverse (black line) and (bottom) 2D scatter plots showing ways to identify endmembers in scenes.  Left: Single scattering albedo (SSA) at 440 nm vs 770 nm and right: 1000 nm band vs red/blue slope.  Circles show locations of endmembers. Color MRO High Resolution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE) 25 cm/pixel data over Curiosity's traverse show aeolian materials along and near Curiosity's traverse exhibit a range of colors and morphologies, including bright transverse ripples, dark sand sheets, and medium-brightness complex polygonal ripple fields. The spectral differences of these areas in CRISM data are consistent with variable dust cover; brighter sands generally have steeper ferric slopes (0.4 - 0.7 µm) and less pronounced mafic-absorption features (1 µm band depth) as compared to dark sands [see also 5].  A key question that arises from this observation is whether or not the bright aeolian ripples are simply more dust-covered or if they also have dust distributed throughout their volume. A related question is whether or not dust, if distributed through the volume of the ripples, makes traversing these bedforms more difficult by changing their physical properties, e.g., more sinkage and associated compaction resistance, and/or higher shear moduli that can increase slip. Scuffs and traverses:  The aeolian features Curiosity has encountered are summarized in Table 1. Curiosity successfully traversed Dingo Gap, a transverse aeolian ridge (TAR) on sol 533. Crossing a complex ripple field on sol 672 led to automatic drive termination when the rover sensed high slip values. Driving into the complex Hidden Valley ripple field on sol 709 also caused an automatic termination due to high slip. In both cases the trailing wheels sunk deeply into the sandy material. Additionally, two dedicated scuff experiments were conducted at Rocknest and Pahrump ripple field for the purposes of assessing the sands' material properties. Location Type Brightness (SSA @ 770nm) Max Rover Slip Rocknest  (sol 57) Sand shadow scuff Bright (0.71) N/A - scuff Dingo Gap  (sol 533) TAR Bright (0.71) 26% Sol 672 Ripple  Complex polygonal Bright (0.70) 80% Sol 683 Ripple Single transverse ripple crossing experiment Bright (0.70) 41% Hidden Valley (sol 709) Complex polygonal Medium (0.68) 77% Pahrump Ripple (sol 800) Complex polygonal experiment scuffing one ripple Medium (0.68) N/A - scuff Table 1: List of aeolian bedforms encountered by Curiosity along with single scattering albedo at 770 nm (brighter material is expected to be dustier) and maximum rover slip encountered. In situ observations: Mastcam color data show all undisturbed aeolian materials at Gale Crater encountered thusfar have a bright dusty cover overlying a   darker substrate. This is similar to the Spirit rover observations at Gusev Crater [6].  APXS data show the bulk weight % of major elements in disturbed soils along the traverse are similar to one another (Fig. 2). There is modest variation in S and Cl, two elements known to correlate strongly with each other and with dust in soils [7], as well as Fe. APXS data also show disturbed soil is depleted in S, Cl, and K and slightly enriched in Cr compared with its undisturbed surface (Fig. 3).   Fig 2: APXS elemental measurements ratioed to Rocknest values   Fig 3: APXS elemental measurements showing the difference between disturbed and undisturbed surfaces within the same deposit ChemCam passive spectral measurements are highly sensitive to the presence of dust [7] and there is a good correlation between ChemCam spectral parameters affected by changes in dust and S content measured by APXS (Fig. 4).    Fig. 4: The ratio of surface reflectance at 770 nm:830 nm from ChemCam passive spectral data versus APXS S content Both ChemCam passive spectra and APXS elemental data suggest disturbed surfaces are less dusty than undisturbed surfaces, as well as a general decrease in dustiness of undisturbed surfaces as Curiosity approached Mt. Sharp. This trend measured in situ is consistent with the CRISM and HiRISE orbital observations presented here and in [4]. Ripple crossing geometries: Analysis of Curiosity drive telemetry and numerical modeling of drives using the ARTMEIS Toolkit [1,2] have shown both high slip events (sol 672 ripple and Hidden Valley traverse) occurred while all rover wheels were pointed uphill in deep sand with trailing wheels deeply embedded and encountering significant compaction resistance (Fig. 5). Curiosity's rear wheels were never in deep sand while trying to push the rover uphill during the successful sol 683 single ripple crossing experiment or at the Dingo Gap crossing and thus did not experience the high compaction resistance and associated high slip.  Fig 5: Example geometry encountered in Hidden Valley where Curiosity had all wheels traveling uphill in deep sand, resulting in high slip and drive termination [2]. Conclusions: Dust is concentrated on the surface of ripples with only a little mixed throughout their volume, and its presence as a thin surface layer likely does not affect Curiosity's ability to traverse these features. The geometry of ripple crossings rather than changes in their physical properties have been the prevailing factor governing their traversability.  Orbital datasets and in situ measurements all suggest Curiosity is entering an area that is less dusty and has higher sand flux than the plains of Gale Crater. These observations agree with atmospheric modeling work that show less dust is expected to be deposited towards the NW flank of Mt. Sharp [9]. Acknowledgements: Funding for this work was provided in large part by Caltech GPS Division Texaco & Keck Institute for Space Studies Postdoctoral Fellowships. References: [1] Arvidson, R.E. (2014) 14th ASCE Conference [2] Stein, N, et al. (2014) AGU Fall Meeting, abstract #P43D-4019 [3] Kreisch, C. et al., (2014) AGU Fall Meeting, abstract #P41A3897 [4] Arvidson, R.E., et al (2014) JGR, 119, 6  [5] Lapotre et al., this conference. [6] Sullivan et al., (2008) JGR, 113, E06S07 [7] Yen, A, et al., (2005), Nature, 436 [8] Johnson, J., et al., (2014), Icarus, in press. [9] Moreau, A.J.M., et al, (2014) 8th International Mars Conference, abstract #1430 