 CHEMCAM INVESTIGATION OF THE JOHN KLEIN AND CUMBERLAND DRILL TAILINGS. R. S. Jackson1, R. C. Wiens2, H. E. Newsom1, D. T. Vaniman3, L.W. Beegle4, S. Maurice5, J. M. Williams1, and the MSL Team; Univ. of New Mexico (Albuquerque, NM 87131; rjacks04@unm.edu), 2Los Alamos National Laboratory, 3Planetary Science Institute, 4Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 5IRAP/CNRS Introduction: This study utilizes ChemCam data for bedrock, drill hole walls, tailings, and unprocessed and sieved dump piles to investigate chemical variations with depth in the drill holes and possible effects of the drilling and sample processing. The ChemCam instrument on the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) rover includes a Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) tool that allows 400 μm spot chemical analyses on Mars. This microprobe device is designed for rapid remote analyses [1]. Following the use of MSL's drill at John Klein on sol 182, ChemCam analyzed the tailings in the area around the drill hole on four occasions from sol 183 to 234 and also sampled the drill hole wall on sol 227. After drilling at Cumberland on sol 279, the tailings were sampled on sols 281 and 289 and the drill hole wall was sampled on sol 284. The two main drill holes are 6.5 cm deep and have a diameter of 1.6 cm; MSL also sieved the material to <150 μm before introducing it to the CheMin and SAM instruments. Unused portions of both the sieved and unsieved material were dumped back onto the surface and analyzed by APXS and ChemCam [3].   Fig. 1: a) Colorized RMI mosaic of the John Klein drill hole and tailings (lighter colored material), with the first 10 observation points from CCAM02183 b) MAHLI image from sol 270 of the John Klein drill hole, with 7 of the 10 ChemCam observations from CCAM02227 adjacent to white, Ca-sulfate veins. c) A night time MAHLI image taken on sol 293 of the Cumberland drill hole, showing ChemCam shots from CCAM07284 with almost no veins visible.  Geologic Background: The drill sites are both in the Sheepbed Member of the Yellowknife Bay Formation. The Sheepbed is the lowest exposed member of the Yellowknife Bay formation and is interpreted as a mudstone that formed in a lacustrine system [2]. The Yellowknife Bay Formation is made up of detrital basaltic materials in addition to clay minerals and an amorphous component. In the two drill samples, the CheMin X-Ray Diffraction investigation detected plagioclase (plus minor sanidine), Fe-forsterite, augite, pigeonite, orthopyroxene, magnetite, pyrrhotite, akaganeite, and Ca-sulfates (anhydrite & bassanite). In addition, ~50 weight percent of both drill samples consist of smectite plus an amorphous component [3]. Analytical Details: The LIBS oxide weight percentages of Si, Ti, Al, Fe, Mg, Ca, Na, and K were calculated with the PLS1 algorithm [e.g., 4]. The concentrations are preliminary, and will be revised for future publication after a new calibration is released. For these sequences, ChemCam made observations at several locations with 30 or 50 laser shots per location; Fig. 2 displays single shot data; Fig. 3 uses the averages of all the shots at a single location (ignoring the first 5 to avoid dust contamination). In this study S is not quantified, but is thought to make up most of a "missing component" when low major-element totals are reported. The missing component is the reported total subtracted from 100%; this is used as a proxy for S in graphs and is supported by the detection of sulfides and Ca-sulfates by CheMin [3], but the missing component includes H2O, Cl, and other minor elements. Target Rock Compositions: The John Klein target had 3 analysis sequences with 23 total observations, including 10 observations vertically from the surface down the bore wall and 3 observations on the tailings from CCAM02183. Cumberland observations included 9 sequences with 84 observations, including 10 observations vertically down the bore wall. As shown in Fig. 3d, the compositions from surface of the rocks cluster in two groups. The first has relatively low Ca and the most observations; the second is a high Ca cluster, with at least 4 observations (3 John Klein observations and one Cumberland observation).  Fig. 2: Graph of all Laser Shots on both bore walls (Observations correspond to labels in Fig. 1). Arrows point to areas with high Ca percentages and indicate sampled Ca-sulfate veins. Shots are on the upper 2 cm of the bore wall. Drill Tailings: ChemCam ran 4 sequences on the John Klein drill tailings with 30 observations and 2 sequences on the Cumberland drill tailings with 15 observations. The drill tailings' oxide compositions are as expected compared to the bulk rock mineralogy reported by CheMin. However, results for the drill  tailings fall along a mixing trend not seen within the target rocks, roughly separated into a lower Ca and a higher Ca group. As such, it seems reasonable to assume that the drill tailings are a mixture of rock and veins and the chemical distribution of the mixed material depends on the local abundance of veins. Since the tailings are almost exclusively from the first 2 cm of the drill hole while the material sampled by the drilling apparatus and delivered to the interior instruments are dominantly from 2-4 cm down the drill hole, any differences between the drill tailings and the drillsampled material could reflect chemical variations with depth. The drill sampled material was dumped after portions were delivered for analysis by SAM and CheMin; dump piles were then analyzed by ChemCam. The John Klein sample was dumped back onto the John Klein tailings and the Cumberland material was carried by the rover for ~200 sols before being dumped. For both dump piles the first 10 shots at each observation point were used in the analysis in order to avoid including any surface material underneath the piles. The first set of graphs in Fig. 3a-c, show a positive correlation between silica and iron. This probably represents a dilution of the mafic silicates from the basalt derived sediments by the Ca-sulfate material. In addition, the observations in the tailings do not fall into the two categories seen in the data from the surface of the rocks, indicating that the tailings are a mixture of mafic sediments and Ca-sulfate material. The John Klein dump pile follows the trend seen in the tailings, but the dump pile values are at the bottom left portion of the trend indicating lower silica and iron. This result may be due to a greater amount of Ca-sulfate veins in that region of the hole. At Cumberland there is distinctly lower iron and silica in the dump pile, compared to the tailings. The next graph (Fig. 3d-e) displays the variation between Ca and the missing component. As previously, the drill tailings represent a mixing trend between the basaltic sediments and diagenetic features, with 4 to 6 Ca-sulfate features identifiable in the data from the rocks and John Klein drill hole wall. Graph 3b suggests that John Klein would have higher Ca and missing component values than the tailings, but the John Klein dump pile has a higher missing component but low and constrained Ca. While the Cumberland dump pile values are lower in both Ca and missing component; these values suggest less Casulfate features in the middle portion of the drill hole, indicating that the reason for the low silica and iron in Fig. 3c is not due to an increase in Ca-sulfate features. Conclusion: The drill tailings represent a mixture of basaltic sediments and diagenetic material like Casulfates; the shots on the drill site surfaces are closer to pure end members. In addition, it is possible that there is a difference in the distribution of materials with depth, evidenced by the data in the dump pile; however, there does not seem to be enough data to ascribe a cause. The John Klein drill tailings have an average Ca composition of 7.7±1.5 weight percent and Cumberland tailings have a Ca composition of 7.5±1.0 weight percent. At these concentrations, the veins most likely contribute about 19% of the Ca component in John Klein and about 8% in Cumberland in order to be consistent with CheMin measurements.  References: [1] Wiens R. C. et al. (2012) Space Science Review, 170, 167. [2] Grotzinger J. P. et al. (2013) Science, DOI: 10.1126/science.1242777. [3] Vaniman D. T. et al. (2013) Science, DOI: 10.1126/science.1243480. [4] Clegg S.M. et al. (2009) Spectrochim. Acta B64, 79-88., Anderson, R. B., et al. (2011). Icarus, 215(2), 608-627. Fig. 3: All data are shots averaged by observation point a) Variation in SiO2 and iron for drill tailings, wall & surface of rocks b) John Klein drill tailings compared to dump pile c) Cumberland drill tailings compared to dump pile d) Variation in CaO & missing component for drill tailings, bore wall, & surface of rocks e) John Klein drill tailings compared to dump pile f) Cumberland drill tailings compared to dump pile 