
2132.PDF
CHARACTERIZATION OF SYNTHETIC AND NATURAL MANGANESE OXIDES AS MARTIAN 
ANALOGUES.  V.K. Fox
1
, R.E. Arvidson
1
, B.L. Jolliff
1
, P.K. Carpenter
1
, J.G. Catalano
1
, M.A.G. Hinkle
1
, and 
R.V. Morris
2
 
1
Washington University, Saint Louis, Missouri (foxv@levee.wustl.edu) 
2 
NASA Johnson Space Cen-
ter, Houston, TX 
 
Introduction: Recent discoveries of highly con-
centrated manganese oxides in Gale Crater [1,2] and 
on the rim of Endeavour Crater [3] by the Mars Sci-
ence Laboratory Curiosity and Mars Exploration Rover 
Opportunity, respectively, imply more highly oxidizing 
aqueous conditions than previously recognized. Man-
ganese oxides are a significant environmental indicator 
about ancient aqueous conditions, provided the phases 
can be characterized reliably. Manganese oxides are 
typically fine-grained and poorly crystalline, making 
the mineral structures difficult to determine, and they 
generally have very low visible reflectance with few 
distinctive spectral features in the visible to near infra-
red, making them a challenge for interpretation from 
remote sensing data [4]. Therefore, these recent dis-
coveries motivate better characterization using meth-
ods available on Mars, particularly visible to near in-
frared (VNIR) spectroscopy, X-ray diffractometry 
(XRD), and compositional measurements. Both rovers 
have complementary instruments in this regard. Oppor-
tunity is equipped with its multispectral visible imager, 
Pancam, and an Alpha Particle X-ray Spectrometer 
(APXS), and Curiosity has the multispectral Mastcam, 
ChemCam (laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy and 
passive spectroscopy), and APXS for in situ character-
ization, and ChemMin (XRD) for collected samples.  
Characterization Methods: This study presents 
initial detailed laboratory analyses of a variety of man-
ganese oxide minerals, including synthesized pure 
specimens and naturally occurring mixed-phase sam-
ples. VNIR spectra were collected  on silt-sized pow-
ders using an ASD field spectrometer from 0.4 to 2.5 
micrometers. X-ray diffraction measurements were 
acquired for these samples using a Bruker D8 Advance 
powder diffractometer and the ICDD XRD pattern 
database to confirm or determine mineral phases. Pre-
liminary measurements were collected on a subset of 
the natural samples using an Edax Orbis Micro X-ray 
fluorescence spectrometer to obtain elemental chemis-
try and spatial variations therein.  
Natural Samples. Traditionally, manganese mineral 
samples have been called  Pyrolusite  or 
 Psilomelane  on the basis of physical appearance 
rather than actual mineralogical composition, because 
these dark and poorly crystalline minerals are difficult 
to identify visually. Therefore, labels, particularly 
those predating modern analytical techniques, are gen-
erally less informative or accurate than desired. Sam-
ples from Washington University s reference mineral 
collection were selected for in-depth characterization 
and were chosen to characterize a range of naturally 
occurring phases and provide data to complement the 
spectral reflectance measurements. Both  pyrolusite  
and  psilomelane   samples were selected for charac-
terization, and included crystalline growths, botryoidal 
masses and dendritic coatings, as well as amorphous 
coatings or masses. Results presented here are exam-
ples of relatively pure phases as determined by XRD 
measurements (Figure 1), although most are best char-
acterized as mixed-phase. Characteristically dark 
VNIR spectra are shown in Figure 2.  
Synthetic Samples. The naturally occurring samples 
were also compared to synthetically generated manga-
nese oxide phases to establish expected spectral behav-
ior of pure end members. These phases include 
pyrolusite ( -Mn4+O2), bixbyite ( -Mn
3+
2O3), 
hausmannite (Mn
2+
Mn
3+
2O4), vernadite 
(Na0.2Mn
4+
0.95O2 nH2O) and both triclinic and hexago-
nal birnessite ((Na,Ca,K)x(Mn
4+
,Mn
3+
)2O4 nH2O) [5]. 
These minerals represent a range of Mn mineral struc-
tures, oxidation states, and common formation envi-
ronments. XRD measurements confirmed mineral 
phases (Figure 3), and VNIR spectra are shown in Fig-
ure 4. The powders are all dark black to dark grey, 
although hausmannite is dark reddish-brown. The 
phyllomanganates (birnessite and vernadite) have ab-
sorption features at 1.9 micrometers that are character-
istic of water within the mineral structure. 
 Comparisons of the spectra of the synthetic sam-
ples to Pancam multispectral data (13 bands from ~0.4 
to 1.0 micrometers) collected by Opportunity of Mn 
oxide bearing rocks Pinnacle and Stuart Islands 
demonstrate that the dark coatings on these rocks are a 
mixed high valence Mn oxides. These discoveries bol-
ster support for widespread aqueous activity through-
out the rim of Endeavour crater, and may be compo-
nents of widespread mineralization occurring as re-
duced groundwater contacted an oxidizing surface [3].  
       Future Work:  The data generated by our labora-
tory measurements will be used to further inform in-
terpretations of recent and future discoveries of high 
concentrations of Mn by both Opportunity and Curiosi-
ty.  The Noachian crater rim that Opportunity contin-
ues to explore and the fluvial lacustrine deposits that 
Curiosity is investigating bear significant evidence for 
aqueous alteration. Better understanding the chemistry 
and mineralogy of observed deposits improves our 
understanding of the role of aqueous processes present 
on ancient Mars, strengthening our interpretations of 
the environmental conditions at the time and the poten-
2132.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
tial for habitable environments.   
 
Figure 1:  X-ray diffraction patterns from four natural-
ly occurring manganese oxides. These samples are 
dominantly single phase, although all likely have mi-
nor secondary components. Sample STR matches with 
both hollandite (Bax(Mn
4+
,Mn
3+
)8O16) and 
cryptomelane (Kx(Mn
3+
Mn
4+
)8O16). Sample 269-3 
matches cryptomelane. Sample 254-6 matches well 
with pyrolusite; Sample 254-19 matches with 
romanechite (Ba.66(Mn
4+
,Mn
3+
)5O10 1.34 H2O).  
 
Figure 2:  VNIR spectra of the same four naturally 
occurring samples as shown in Figure 1. All the pow-
ders are a very dark grey color, and very low visible 
reflectance. The wavelength range shown from 0.4 to 
1.0 micrometers is comparable to Pancam or Mastcam. 
 
Figure 3: XRD patterns of the laboratory synthe-
sized phyllomanganates, also shown in Figure 4. 
Mixed valence phyllomanganates are considered a 
possible analogue for observations on Mars. 
 
Figure 4:  VNIR spectra of synthetic manganese 
oxides, representing a range of oxidation states, includ-
ing mixed valences. In the visible wavelengths, all 
samples have very low reflectance, though 
hausmannite is reddish.  
References:  
[1] Lanza, N. et al (2014) GRL. [2] Lanza, N. et al. (in re-
view) Nature Geoscience. [3] Arvidson, R.E., et al (in re-
view) Nature Geoscience. [4] Post, J.E., (1999) Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 96, 3447 3454. [5] Hinkle. M.A.G. (2014) PhD 
dissertation, Washington University in Saint Louis. 
2132.pdf46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
